### Notes on Equal Protection Theory

Before we get into our core Equal Protection material, let's think about Procedural Due Process again.

You may have noticed that Procedural Due Process draws on one of the core themes of Constitutional Law: the separation of powers. One way to understand what happened in Bi-Metallic is that procedural due process drew the line between the functions of the judiciary and that of the legislature. The legislature makes rules, but doesn't apply then to any person in particular; a person isn't entitled to the procedural protections of judicial process as long as the legislature sticks to that role. The judicial role begins when decisions start getting made that apply to individuals.^[How does the executive fit in all this? Well, the executive applies law to individuals, but typically by invoking judicial process. Also, the executive runs the administrative agencies, and, if you take administrative law, you'll learn that the Bi-Metallic case tracks what ad law people know as the distinction between "regulation" and "adjudication."]

Let's think of this a little more carefully, though. Suppose the legislature makes a law "nobody may drive over sixty-five miles per hour." I don't get to show up in court and demand procedural due process to challenge the law's mere existence. Of course, when I get pulled over for speeding, I get to challenge the application of the law to me by the executive (for example, to claim I wasn't speeding, that the police misinterpreted the statute, or to bring some other, substantive, constitutional challenge to the law), but I don't get to claim that the legislature followed improper procedures in regulating me in the first place, because the law was general. If the legislature enacted a law saying "Paul Gowder doesn't get to drive over sixty-five," then I get to challenge that law on procedural due process grounds in addition to all the rest.

In short: the legislative branch makes general law, but does not get to operate on individuals.  Legislative acts, properly understood, typically aren't subject to due process challenge.  The judiciary and executive apply those laws to individuals, and are subject to procedural constraint before doing so.

Yet, you might think this is kind of alarming. The legislature can't take your property individually. But it can enact generally applicable laws that simply strip away property rights from everyone. But isn't that worse? To be sure, the democratic process protects you against such laws, as the Court pointed out in *Bi-Metallic*. But that's cold comfort: if the government just tried to take your property individually, you'd still have the protections of the democratic process, but you'd also get the protections of the courts. So why is the more dangerous power covered by fewer protections?

One answer we might give is that the democratic process is more effective in regulating generally applicable laws. If Congress just passes a law like "the police go beat up Paul Gowder" or "we take Paul Gowder's stuff" (laws which, respectively, also violate the bill of attainder clause and, in the absence of compensation, the takings clause) then my fellow citizens don't have any particular motivation to put a stop to it. But if Congress passes a law "the police beat everyone up" then there's a pretty good chance the voters will have some things to say about it, because it hurts them too. For that reason, many constitutional scholars would say that one key idea is that the Courts give more scrutiny to laws directed at people who can't defend themselves in the political process. 

That, of course, is the core message of the most famous footnote in all of constitutional law: footnote four in *United States v. Carolene Products*. If judicial scrutiny is directed at protecting the democratic process, then Carolene Products identifies at least two obvious grounds for invoking that scrutiny. First, "legislation which restricts those political processes which can ordinarily be expected to bring about repeal of undesirable legislation," like infringements on voting rights and free speech, and second, "prejudice against discrete and insular minorities ... which tends seriously to curtail the operation of those political processes ordinarily to be relied upon to protect minorities."

----

If we interpret procedural due process as essentially the command that the legislature make generally applicable laws, rather than target particular people, then that leads us right into the next area of constitutional law for this course, in which we directly struggle with the command that the law only be equal. The Equal Protection Clause. As we'll see, that's usually interpreted as a kind of generality requirement: the government is required to have particular reasons before it treats people differently. But this one applies not just to the legislature, but to the executive too, forbidding, for example, racial discrimination in policing. 

A thing you may have noted from reading Dred Scott is that these ideas of Equal Protection and Due Process are intimately connected with the notion of citizenship. You might think that all of Section 1 really says one big thing: everyone born in the U.S. is a citizen (i.e., regardless of race, and including freed slaves); in virtue of that citizenship all are equal; among the attributes of equal citizenship (indeed, among the privileges and immunities of citizenship) are equal treatment under the law as well as the protection of the laws and access to legal process ("due" process, even)---that is, precisely that cluster of rights and statuses that were denied Black Americans in Dred Scott. 

----

**Equal Protection of the laws is what?**

The Equal Protection Clause comprises the following parts of the text of the 14th Amendment: "no state shall... deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws."

Let's start by noticing some of the textual ambiguity here.

- As before, who is a "person?" But that's the easiest question. Here are some harder ones.

- First, is there a similar principle that applies to the federal government? The text says "state."  Does that mean the feds can do things like engage in race discrimination?

There isn't an equal protection clause for the feds written into the constitution, but in *Bolling v. Sharpe*, 347 U.S. 497 (1954) the Court basically turned around and applied equal protection principles to the federal government through the Fifth Amendment's due process clause. We'll talk about this more later, but some people think this was a dubious move, and that there's reason to think that equal protection principles apply less stringently (if at all) to the feds than to the states.

Another is what counts as "equal" law. One way to think about the idea of equal law is law that treats everyone the same. Another is law that treats people equally given their circumstances. Here's an example: a hypothetical law "everyone must pay a poll tax of ten thousand dollars in order to vote" nominally treats everyone the same, but is it really an "equal" law, or is it a law that treats the poor unequally?

Finally, another puzzle is the use of the word "protection." Does that limit the scope of the equal protection clause? We'll talk about that in a moment. First, a little bit more background and context.

Let's think about two legal routes a plaintiff might use to attack government action that treats her differently. One way is the procedural due process route. *Londoner v. City and County of Denver* is the epitome of that route. The procedural due process route allows a plaintiff to say "this government action singled me out, and I'm entitled to procedural protections before that happens." It isn't an attack on the substantive result: the procedural due process claim in Londoner wasn't "the tax assessment they imposed on me was illegal, or was for the wrong amount." Instead, it's "even if the tax assessment ultimately turns out to be legally correct, I'm entitled to a formal process to allow that to be determined."

By contrast, let me tell you about another case that we'll not be reading. We're skipping this case not because it's too hard but because it's too easy, but it's still well worth a look at some point. In *Village of Willowbrook v. Olech*, 528 U.S. 562 (2000), the Court held that a plaintiff could raise an equal protection challenge to a city requirement that she grant a 33 foot easement on her property as a condition of getting a connection to the city water supply. The basis of the challenge was that the plaintiff was treated differently: other citizens seeking water connections had only been required to give up 15-foot easements. But the nub of the claim wasn't procedural---Olech wasn't claiming that she had been denied a hearing. Rather, it was substantive: she claimed that the decision was illegal for unjustifiably treating her differently from everyone else.

So one way to think about both procedural due process and equal protection are as alternative ways for plaintiffs to raise the classic kindergarten claim "UNCLE SAM WAS PICKING ON ME!" As the lawyer for plaintiff, you want to bring a procedural process claim when your client has been picked on by a general law or power that has been applied to her individually without a hearing.  For example, the government threw your client in jail without a hearing, or the legislature passed a bill of attainder against her (quick exercise: go find out what a bill of attainder is if you don't already know).  

By contrast, you want to bring an equal protection "class of one" claim---that's the kind of claim at issue in *Willowbrook v. Olech*---when some government agent has applied some kind of general rule or power to your client but you think the rule itself or its application is substantively unfair---there is insufficient reason to treat your client one way and to treat everyone else differently. We'll fill out this notion of "insufficient reason" in the coming weeks, that's the core doctrinal question in equal protection law.

In sum, the key difference between EPC and PDP is that EPC is about the *substantive fairness of government action* while PDP is about the *fairness of the procedure that is used to determine government action*.

But, of course, most equal protection cases aren't about singling out individuals. They're about singling out groups. Let's turn to that.

**Let's be originalist for a second.**

If we think about the actual history of the Equal Protection Clause, it was, of course, enacted to protect groups, and in particular one group: Black Americans. After all, the Fourteenth Amendment was one of the three Reconstruction Amendments, imposed on the defeated South after the Civil War; in the context of the Thirteenth Amendment, outlawing slavery, and the Fifteenth Amendment, establishing the right to vote for freedmen, it is obvious that the point was to regularize the legal status of freed slaves. An originalist might some potentially uncomfortable questions, like "why does it prevent anything other than race discrimination?"  And a textualist might answer "because they wrote it in much broader terms!" Were the framers of the 14th Amendment trying to express a general ideal of equality, even though the problem with which they were immediately confronted was the egregious racism of the Confederate states?

Another question about Equal Protection is about how much work the word "protection" is supposed to do.  If we were being strictly textualist, we might worry that there's a difference between "equality under the law" and equality in terms of the literal "protection" of the law. Maybe a literal reading of the text just means that the government has to protect everyone from violence, but doesn't mean antidiscrimination in things like schools and train cars? 

From an originalist standpoint, there's some historical basis that kind of interpretation. (But by now we should see that there's historical basis for all kinds of weird interpretations, so I wouldn't recommend putting a huge amount of stock into small discrete pieces of evidence.) One critical way that the South oppressed black people in the era from the end of Reconstruction through Jim Crow is by failing to protect black citizens from white violence. The Southern states simply failed to enforce the laws against things like murder and assault and arson against white people who committed those crimes against black people, thus allowing organized racial terror groups like the Ku Klux Klan, lynch mobs, etc. to run rampant. On a literal textualist reading of the Equal Protection Clause, this is the core behavior it was intended to forbid. White people had the protection of the laws from violence, black people didn't.

Consider, in this context, the Enforcement Act of 1871 (better known as the Ku Klux Klan act), 17 Stat. 13. Most significantly, section 3 of the act reads in relevant part as follows:

> That in all cases where insurrection, domestic violence, unlawful combinations, or conspiracies in any State shall so obstruct or hinder the execution of the laws thereof, and of the United States, as to deprive any portion or class of the people of such State of any of the rights, privileges, or immunities, or protection, named in the constitution and secured by this act, and the constituted authorities of such State shall either be unable to protect, or shall, from any cause, fail in or refuse protection of the people in such rights, such facts shall be deemed a denial by such State of the equal protection of the laws to which they are entitled under the constitution of the United States: and in all such cases... it shall be lawful for the President, and it shall be his duty to take such measures, by the employment of the militia or the land and naval forces of the United States... as he may deem necessary for the suppression of such insurrection, domestic violence, or conspiracies.

In other words, Congress was specifically concerned about the failure of states to protect people from violence, and directly described that as a violation of "equal protection." Section 4 of the act goes on to address cases in which "the constituted authorities are in complicity with, or shall connive at the unlawful purposes of, such powerful and armed combinations," and authorizes the President to suspend habeas corpus.

But we now universally think the Equal Protection Clause covers a much broader scope. It's well established that the equal protection clause covers discrimination against people other than African-Americans, and that it prohibits discriminatory law in general, not just---or perhaps not even---the mere failure to protect people against private criminality.^[I say perhaps not even because there's some nasty caselaw about there being no private claim for police failure to protect, although there are still arguments available---see generally *DeShaney v. Winnebago County Department of Social Services*, 489 U.S. 189 (1989). This has been a particular issue in domestic violence cases, about which Harvard's Berkman center has a really interesting discussion at this link: [http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/vaw00/basics.html](http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/vaw00/basics.html).)]

***Classification vs subordination***

There are two ways of interpreting the idea of discriminatory law. One is "the classification approach." The idea here is that a law discriminates, and thus is subject to equal protection challenge, if it treats people differently. On the classification approach, it doesn't matter whether the law that treats people differently is good or bad for some subordinated minority group. For example, a law providing favorable treatment to black people is just as subject to challenge as a law injuring black people.

The other approach is the subordination approach. The idea there is that the Equal Protection Clause isn't about people being treated differently, it's about unjust social hierarchy. The clause only prohibits laws creating or perpetuating unjust social hierarchy. 

The key difference between those theories can be seen in the context of debates like affirmative action. Defenders of affirmative action would find an anti-subordination approach very congenial: it would allow one to argue "the purpose of government affirmative action is to remedy the social consequences of racism, to promote social equality across racial groups, so it's acceptable." Opponents of affirmative action prefer a classification approach, and argue "it still predicates government action on race, so it's still discriminatory."

The choice between those two conceptions of equal protection is a subject of hot academic dispute. The defenders of the subordination approach have two main arguments: first, a historical or originalist argument: the same victorious northern abolitionist Republicans who imposed the Fourteenth Amendment on the South also passed a bunch of laws that quite explicitly provided favorable treatment to freed slaves. For example, Congress set up the Freedmen's Bureau, which provided copious financial assistance to former slaves, and attempted to carry out outright redistribution. And this also makes more sense in context. If the purpose of the amendment at the time was to regularize the status of freed slaves, then this doesn't mean treating the freed slaves the same as the enslavers, it means raising the condition of the freed slaves until they can stand on an equal footing. The second is a philosophical and moral argument about what equal law means... that argument is a bit more complex, but if you want the very best version of it, well, I published that article myself, it's called Equal Law in an Unequal World. Feel free to read it.

By contrast, the classification approach defenders have a very strong argument of their own, which is fundamentally that the courts are not competent to adjudicate social hierarchy. Can you imagine showing up to court and having to convince a court, ok, group A is socially dominant relative to group B, so the law ought to allow discrimination in favor of B and against A? This is practically the definition of a political question, something so messy and controversial that it seems like it would be outrageous to allow the judicial branch to make rulings about it.

But I said "academic dispute" for a reason. As a matter of doctrine, the Supreme Court has come down squarely on the side of the classification approach. This isn't necessarily permanent. Lots of academics and some activists (particularly on the political left) advocate for the Court to go to the subordination approach. But they haven't done so yet. 

So the first step in any equal protection claim (except a class of one claim, as noted above) is to establish that the challenged state action classifies people into some kind of group along some dimension, like race, gender, sexual orientation, or, really, any kind of classification, like neighborhood or hair color or political party or whatever.

Ok, so that's really the basis for understanding equal protection. You need to understand that stuff, because it'll help us explain the weird decisions that seem to come down from the Supreme Court on the daily. Now let's drill down some into the details.

**More and less suspect classifications**

The entry point to equal protection doctrine is the idea of different kinds of suspicion attached to different classifications. If we're going to be originalists at all, then we can't just flat-out ignore the fact that this Amendment was put into the constitution in order to prevent race discrimination. If we know *nothing else* about the Fourteenth Amendment, we know that. So, intuitively, the courts ought to have a shorter fuse for race discrimination than for other kinds of discrimination. 

In general, even if we follow the classification approach, we ought to think that some kinds of classification are more worrisome for the purposes of equal protection scrutiny than others.

"But wait!" you say. "Why do we need to do this at all? Why don't we just forbid classifications?" Well, we can't do that. Every law is a classification. The law "people under 21 can't buy booze" is an obvious example, but obviously we don't want that to be unconstitutional. "Latino people can't buy booze?" Clearly unconstitutional. One way to explain those judgments is to say that racial classifications get treated more suspiciously than age classifications. And, indeed, that's exactly what we do. Recognizing that every law classifies citizens into a group of people that are covered and a group of people that aren't, the Supreme Court has established a hierarchy of classifications ordered by their level of suspiciousness.

There are a bunch of different groups, and I'll give you a handout later on which summarizes all of this for you. But here's the secret takeaway in all of this. The subordination view has snuck back into the classification view, it has to sneak back into the classification view, because we have to have a way of telling which classifications are nasty and which are not nasty, otherwise we have to give careful equal protection scrutiny to laws that distinguish between children and adults, or people convicted of felonies and people not convicted of felonies, and all kinds of other classifications that many people intuitively accept.

For right now, the minimum you need to know is this:

1.  Race is a suspect classification, meaning that when the government classifies people by race it is very likely to get struck down. There are other suspect classifications, but race is the big one.

2.  Gender is a semi-suspect classification, meaning that when the government classifies by gender, it's still quite likely, although not as likely, to get struck down.

3.  Most other kinds of classifications are not suspect classifications, meaning that it's pretty likely for such classifications to be upheld.

One of the most persistent questions in all of equal protection law is how to decide what's a suspect classification. Race is the easy case, because, again, the amendment was written to stop race discrimination. But there are lots of other issues about how we figure out which other categories get treated as suspicious. Does it have something to do with a history of discrimination? Does it have something to do with that idea given in Carolene products of "discrete and insular minorities," that is, people who are easy to target and too politically weak, because a minority, to defend themselves in the democratic process? We'll explore that in more detail in a few weeks, in particular in the context of debates over how sexual orientation discrimination should be treated.

A second key question that we'll consider is: "how do we tell when a classification is happening?" In other words, what kind of relationship between government action and race counts as a classification (Sneak preview: it revolves around intent.)

**Fundamental Rights Equal Protection**

One thing that you might have noticed is that Reynolds v. Sims claimed to be an Equal Protection case, yet wasn't about a suspect classification (at least ostensibly... one always has to suspect a race element when we're talking about voting in Alabama in 1964). Yet the Court applied nothing even remotely resembling rational basis. After all, it might be perfectly rational for a state to decide, for example, that different geographic centers in a state have different interests that ought to be related in the legislature, and hence guarantee a minimum representation by county. But the Court didn't follow that approach.^[Actually, that's not strictly true. Remember that the Court did say "So long as the divergences from a strict population standard are based on legitimate considerations incident to the effectuation of a rational state policy, some deviations from the equal-population principle are constitutionally permissible with respect to the apportionment of seats in either or both of the two houses of a bicameral state legislature." But if geographic/regional interest representation doesn't qualify as a legitimate interest, it's hard to see what does, and I don't think we should take this nod to rational basis language very seriously. After all, in the very next paragraph, the Court took that concession away: "But if, even as a result of a clearly rational state policy of according some legislative representation to political subdivisions, population is submerged as the controlling consideration in the apportionment of seats in the particular legislative body, then the right of all of the State's citizens to cast an effective and adequately weighted vote would be unconstitutionally impaired."] What gives?

The answer is that there is a kind of hybrid Equal Protection/Substantive Due Process path into strict scrutiny.  If Substantive Due Process tells us that you get strict scrutiny if the government infringes a fundamental right ("nobody may buy contraception"), and Equal Protection tells that you get strict scrutiny if the government discriminates among a suspect classification, even with a non-fundamental right ("black people sit on the back of the bus"), this hybrid path entails that you get strict scrutiny if the government discriminates in the administration of a fundamental right, even if it doesn't do so on the basis of a suspect classification. Since voting is a fundamental right, even though the government didn't exactly *infringe* that right (it didn't keep anyone from voting) in Reynolds, it still allocated it differently to different people, so the court applied something resembling strict scrutiny (even though it didn't say as much explicitly).
