### Note on the Notion of Economic Fundamental Rights

After the fall of Lochner, the basic rule is that constitutional challenges to economic regulation only get rational basis scrutiny.

The history, as noted above, is that there was a period of jurisprudence known as the "Lochner era." The Lochner era did for economic rights kind of what, as we'll see, the current conservative justices argue Griswold, Roe, and now Obergefell did for personal and family rights, that is, it kind of took a variety of ideas, primarily the contracts clause and the various property rights protections, and generalized out from them to a general idea of economic liberty.^[The Contracts Clause? What's that? Article 1, section 10: forbids states from "impairing the obligation of contracts." There's lots of debate about what it means; many have argued it just means prohibiting the states from passing bankruptcy laws on their own, leaving that power to Congress, others have argued that it prohibits the states repudiating their public contracts, particularly their public debts---that's closest to what the Court does with it today in those rare cases it comes up. Some libertarian legal scholars read it as a general liberty of contract provision.]

This era was brought to an end by the New Deal. In the context of the Great Depression and World War II, there was immense political support for more economic regulation than the Court would permit. So Roosevelt started proposing really harsh exercises of the political branches' power to keep the Court in line, primarily "court-packing," altering the number of justices on the court basically to ensure that he could win cases by appointing a bunch of allies, but he was also at various points considering "jurisdiction stripping," depriving the Court of jurisdiction over cases that could undermine the New Deal. Note that Article III section 2 permits jurisdiction-stripping in cases that don't arise within the Court's original jurisdiction ("In all the other Cases before mentioned, the supreme Court shall have appellate Jurisdiction, both as to Law and Fact, with such Exceptions, and under such Regulations as the Congress shall make."). As for court-packing, the constitution doesn't specify the number of justices, and Congress had made that decision by statute from the start.

So then the court backed down. The standard story is that around the time the court-packing bill was introduced, Justice Owen Roberts thought to himself "oh dear, now we're really in trouble," and changed his vote in West Coast Hotel, making it 5-4 against overturning the regulation, and from there, case after case start coming down upholding the New Deal. That story, obviously, is a gross oversimplification, but it probably still captures the heart of the political environment. Arguably, this is a case study in how the Court doesn't really have ultimate power to undermine the democratic will, because its power over the political branches is only backed up by political support for it. If the political branches want, they can just ignore its rulings, or, as the New Dealers considered, gut it by statute, and they can get away with doing so as long as the people don't punish them at the polls for it.

It's one of the ironies of history that a regulation which we would now consider a patent violation of the Equal Protection Clause---singling out women and for disparate, paternalist, economic regulation---was the tipping point for ending the Lochner era. So, I guess, thanks to the patriarchy?

So Lochner not only is obviously not good law, it kinds of stands as an exemplar of the opposite of good law: it's up there with Dred Scott, Plessy, and Korematsu, although obviously not nearly as evil as those, in those cases that we use as judicial swear words --- tell a judge she or he is doing a Lochner thing, and those are fighting words. (Interestingly, the first Justice Harlan dissented in both Lochner and Plessy. They probably should have listened to him more.)

**Should there be economic fundamental rights?**

That being said, it's a useful exercise to take seriously the proposition that there should be economic fundamental rights. Let's consider two major arguments. 

The first is that the method for finding fundamental rights that we still use today can seem a lot like something that could be used to justify Lochner; when you're reading Griswold and then Glucksberg look out for places to find similarities to Lochner as well as to the two factors that we've isolated as leading to a judicial finding of a fundamental right. They won't be explicit in the text, but try to consider economic rights under the framework we developed and ask whether they should be fundamental. More intuitively: given the character of the United States and its politics, its history in terms of things like rebelling against taxation (remember the Stamp Act from your history classes?), and all the rest, why should we think that contraception is more fundamental to the American idea of individual rights than lassiez-faire economics?

The second is the issue of improper motives for economic regulation. One thing that you might think is that, consistent with the broad theory of judicial scrutiny articulated in the Carolene Products footnote (and fleshed out in John Hart Ely, *Democracy and Distrust*, as the theory of "representation-reinforcement"), economic regulation is actually particularly likely to fall victim to democratic failure. Why? Well, many economic regulations tend to have a small group of beneficiaries who gain a lot, and a large group of people in the rest of society who only pay a little. As the political scientist Mancur Olson explained in his book *The Logic of Collective Action*, it's lots easier to organize small groups to receive local benefits.

Economicsts call this general pattern "rent-seeking." We can see a classic example in the so-called "NIMBY" ("Not In My Backgard") pattern of land use regulation, in which homeowners organize to demand that city governments impose restrictive land use regulations, like single-family occupancy requirements or rental permit quotas, that massively benefit their own land values, while inflicting costs on the rest of the community in the form of increased rents. 

In the context of the end of the Lochner era, the case that many libertarians point to in order to really highlight this worry is Wiliamson v. Lee Optical, 348 U.S. 483 (1955). This was another leading post-Lochner case restating and making absolutely clear that economic regulations now get rational basis review. The law at issue in Williamson prevented an optician from replacing the lenses in glasses---or even putting old lenses in new frames---without a     prescription from an optometrist. But there wasn't really a whole lot of evidence that there was actually a real problem to be solved. Critics of the case think they know why the law was enacted: because some optometrists had cronies in the legislature, and they wanted to make a law to get more business. The district court tried to strike the law down under a rational basis standard; the court reversed. But should it have? Is it part of the proper role of the judiciary to guard against this kind of corrupt regulation? Should rent-seeking be constitutionally cognizable?^[These days, libertarians who object to Williamson v. Lee Optical seem to mostly argue that the court's error was to allow the government to defend the law with hypothetical reasoning, rather than to examine the actual reasons offered for the law to see if they're rational. On that argument, there wouldn't need to be an economic fundamental right leading to strict scrutiny, but rational basis would become rather stricter.]

Against the libertarian constitutional theorists, one might point out that one person's rent-seeking regulation is another person's consumer protection regulation. Is it really within the competence of courts to judge whether the anti-competitive nature of a regulation outweighs its public benefit, or whether a legislature was really influenced by a bunch of lobbyists rather than the public interest?

It is worth noting, though it is beyond the scope of this course, that some economic regulations have been successfully attacked in the post-Lochner era under the 5th Amendment's takings clause. See, e.g., *Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council*, 505 U.S. 1003 (1992) (regulation barring all economically viable use of land was taking unless use violated common law of nuisance); *Eastern Enterprises v. Apfel*, 524 U.S. 498 (1998) (split opinion in which plurality found that law retroactively requiring coal industry employers to pay retirement benefits was taking, while some justices thought that due process was appropriate lens through which to analyze case due to retroactivity); Dolan v. City of Tigard, 512 U.S. 374 (1994) (building permit conditions imposed by city are taking unless related to property and have "rough proportionality" to impact on community of development).

