259 U.S. 20

42 S.Ct. 449

66 L.Ed. 817

BAILEY  
v.  
DREXEL FURNITURE CO. CHILD LABOR TAX CASE.

No. 657.

Argued March 8, 1922.

Decided May 15, 1922.

Mr. Solicitor General Beck, of Washington D. C., for plaintiff in error.

[Argument of Counsel from pages 21-27 intentionally omitted]

Mr. Wm. P. Bynum, of Greensboro, N. C., for defendant in error.

[Argument of Counsel from pages 28-33 intentionally omitted]

Mr. Chief Justice TAFT delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

This case presents the question of the constitutional validity of the Child
Labor Tax Law. The plaintiff below, the Drexel Furniture Company, is engaged
in the manufacture of furniture in the Western district of North Carolina. On
September 20, 1921, it received a notice from Bailey, United States collector
of internal revenue for the district, that it had been assessed $6,312.79 for
having during the taxable year 1919 employed and permitted to work in its
factory a boy under 14 years of age, thus incurring the tax of 10 per cent. on
its net profits for that year. The company paid the tax under protest, and,
after rejection of its claim for a refund, brought this suit. On demurrer to
an amended complaint, judgment was entered for the company against the
collector for the full amount, with interest. The writ of error is prosecuted
by the collector direct from the District Court under section 238 of the
Judicial Code (Comp. St. § 1215).

2

The Child Labor Tax Law is title No. XII of an act entitled 'An act to provide
revenue and for other purposes,' approved February 24, 1919, 40 Stat. 1057,
1138 (Comp. St. Ann. Supp. 1919, §§ 6336 7/8 a to 6336 7/8 h). The heading of
the title is 'Tax on Employment of Child Labor.' It begins with section 1200
and includes eight sections. Section 1200 is as follows:

3

'Sec. 1200. That every person (other than a bona fide boys' or girls' canning
club recognized by the agricultural department of a state and of the United
States) operating (a) any mine or quarry situated in the United States in
which children under the age of sixteen years have been employed or permitted
to work during any portion of the taxable year; or (b) any mill, cannery,
workshop, factory, or manufacturing establishment situated in the United
States in which children under the age of fourteen years have been employed or
permitted to work, or children between the ages of fourteen and sixteen have
been employed or permitted to work more than eight hours in any day or more
than six days in any week, or after the hour of seven o'clock post meridian,
or before the hour of six o'clock ante meridian, during any portion of the
taxable year, shall pay for each taxable year, in addition to all other taxes
imposed by law, an excise tax equivalent to 10 per centum of the entire net
profits received or accrued for such year from the sale or disposition of the
product of such mine, quarry, mill, cannery, workship, factory, or
manufacturing establishment.'

4

Section 1203 relieves from liability to the tax any one who employs a child,
believing him to be of proper age relying on a certificate to this effect
issued by persons prescribed by a board consisting of the Secretary of the
Treasury, the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, and the Secretary of Labor, or
issued by state authorities. The section also provides in paragraph (b)
that----

5

'The tax imposed by this title shall not be imposed in the case of any person
who proves to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the only employment or
permission to work which but for this section would subject him to the tax,
has been of a child employed or permitted to work under a mistake of fact as
to the age of such child and without intention to evade the tax.'

6

Section 1206 gives authority to the Commissioner of Internal Revenue, or any
other person authorized by him 'to enter and inspect at any time any mine,
quarry, mill, cannery, workshop, factory or manufacturing establishment.' The
Secretary of Labor, or any person whom he authorizes, is given like authority
in order to comply with a request of the Commissioner to make such inspection
and report the same. Any person who refuses entry or obstructs inspection is
made subject to fine or imprisonment or both.

7

The law is attacked on the ground that it is a regulation of the employment of
child labor in the states--an exclusively state function under the federal
Constitution and within the reservations of the Tenth Amendment. It is
defendant on the ground that it is a mere excise tax levied by the Congress of
the United States under its broad power of taxation conferred by section 8,
article 1, of the federal Constitution. We must construe the law and interpret
the intent and meaning of Congress from the language of the act. The words are
to be given their ordinary meaning unless the context shows that they are
differently used. Does this law impose a tax with only that incidental
restraint and regulation which a tax must inevitably involve? Or does it
regulate by the use of the so-called tax as a penalty? If a tax, it is clearly
an excise. If it were an excise on a commodity or other thing of value, we
might not be permitted under previous decisions of this court to infer solely
from its heavy burden that the act intends a prohibition instead of a tax. But
this act is more. It provides a heavy exaction for a departure from a detailed
and specified course of conduct in business. That course of business is that
employers shall employ in mines and quarries, children of an age greater than
16 years; in mills and factories, children of an age greater than 14 years,
and shall prevent children of less than 16 years in mills and factories from
working more than 8 hours a day or 6 days in the week. If an employer departs
from this prescribed course of business, he is to pay to the government one-
tenth of his entire net income in the business for a full year. The amount is
not to be proportioned in any degree to the extent or frequency of the
departures, but is to be paid by the employer in full measure whether he
employs 500 children for a year, or employs only one for a day. Moreover, if
he does not know the child is within the named age limit, he is not to pay;
that is to say, it is only where he knowingly departs from the prescribed
course that payment is to be exacted. Scienters are associated with penalties,
not with taxes. The employer's factory is to be subject to inspection at any
time not only by the taxing officers of the Treasury, the Department normally
charged with the collection of taxes, but also by the Secretary of Labor and
his subordinates, whose normal function is the advancement and protection of
the welfare of the workers. In the light of these features of the act, a court
must be blind not to see that the so-called tax is imposed to stop the
employment of children within the age limits prescribed. Its prohibitory and
regulatory effect and purpose are palpable. All others can see and understand
this. How can we properly shut our minds to it?

8

It is the high duty and function of this court in cases regularly brought to
its bar to decline to recognize or enforce seeming laws of Congress, dealing
with subjects not intrusted to Congress, but left or committed by the supreme
law of the land to the control of the states. We cannot avoid the duty, even
though it require us to refuse to give effect to legislation designed to
promote the highest good. The good sought in unconstitutional legislation is
an insidious feature, because it leads citizens and legislators of good
purpose to promote it, without thought of the serious breach it will make in
the ark of our covenant, or the harm which will come from breaking down
recognized standards. In the maintenance of local self-government, on the one
hand, and the national power, on the other, our country has been able to
endure and prosper for near a century and a half.

9

Out of a proper respect for the acts of a co-ordinate branch of the
government, this court has gone far to sustain taxing acts as such, even
though there has been ground for suspecting, from the weight of the tax, it
was intended to destroy its subject. But in the act before us the presumption
of validity cannot prevail, because the proof of the contrary is found on the
very face of its provisions. Grant the validity of this law, and all that
Congress would need to do, hereafter, in seeking to take over to its control
any one of the great number of subjects of public interest, jurisdiction of
which the states have never parted with, and which are reserved to them by the
Tenth Amendment, would be to enact a detailed measure of complete regulation
of the subject and enforce it by a socalled tax upon departures from it. To
give such magic to the word 'tax' would be to break down all constitutional
limitation of the powers of Congress and completely wipe out the sovereignty
of the states.

10

The difference between a tax and a penalty is sometimes difficult to define,
and yet the consequences of the distinction in the required method of their
collection often are important. Where the sovereign enacting the law has power
to impose both tax and penalty, the difference between revenue production and
mere regulation may be immaterial, but not so when one sovereign can impose a
tax only, and the power of regulation rests in another. Taxes are occasionally
imposed in the discretion of the Legislature on proper subjects with the
primary motive of obtaining revenue from them and with the incidental motive
of discouraging them by making their continuance onerous. They do not lose
their character as taxes because of the incidental motive. But there comes a
time in the extension of the penalizing features of the so-called tax when it
loses its character as such and becomes a mere penalty, with the
characteristics of regulation and punishment. Such is the case in the law
before us. Although Congress does not invalidate the contract of employment or
expressly declare that the employment within the mentioned ages is illegal, it
does exhibit its intent practically to achieve the latter result by adopting
the criteria of wrongdoing and imposing its principal consequence on those who
transgress its standard.

11

The case before us cannot be distinguished from that of Hammer v. Dagenhart,
247 U. S. 251, 38 Sup. Ct. 529, 62 L. Ed. 1101, 3 A. L. R. A. 649, Ann. Cas.
1918 E, 724. Congress there enacted a law to prohibit gransportation in
interstate commerce of goods made at a factory in which there was employment
of children within the same ages and for the same number of hours a day and
days in a week as are penalized by the act in this case. This court held the
law in that case to be void. It said:

12

'In our view the necessary effect of this act is, by means of a prohibition
against the movement in interstate commerce of ordinary commercial
commodities, to regulate the hours of labor of children in factories and mines
within the states, a purely state authority.'

13

In the case at the bar, Congress in the name of a tax which on the face of the
act is penalty seeks to do the same thing, and the effort must be equally
futile.

14

The analogy of the Dagenhart Case is clear. The congressional power over
interstate commerce is, within its proper scope, just as complete and
unlimited as the congressional power to tax, and the legislative motive in its
exercise is just as free from judicial suspicion and inquiry. Yet when
Congress threatened to stop interstate commerce in ordinary and necessary
commodities, unobjectionable as subjects of transportation, and to deny the
same to the people of a state in order to coerce them into compliance with
Congress' regulation of state concerns, the court said this was not in fact
regulation of interstate commerce, but rather that of state concerns and was
invalid. So here the so-called tax is a penalty to coerce people of a state to
act as Congress wishes them to act in respect of a matter completely the
business of the state government under the federal Constitution. This case
requires as did the Dagenhart Case the application of the principle announced
by Chief Justice Marshall in McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 423 (4 L.
Ed. 579), in a much-quoted passage: 'Should Congress, in the execution of its
powers, adopt measures which are prohibited by the Constitution; or should
Congress, under the pretext of executing its powers, pass laws for the
accomplishment of objects not intrusted to the government; it would become the
painful duty of this tribunal, should a case requiring such a decision come
before it, to say that such an act was not the law of the land.'

15

But it is pressed upon us that this court has gone so far in sustaining taxing
measures the effect and tendency of which was to accomplish purposes not
directly within congressional power that we are bound by authority to maintain
this law.

16

The first of these is Veazie Bank v. Fenno, 8 Wall. 533, 19 L. Ed. 482. In
that case, the validity of a law which increased a tax on the circulating
notes of persons and state banks from one per centum to 10 per centum was in
question. The main question was whether this was a direct tax to be
apportioned among the several states 'according to their respective numbers.'
This was answered in the negative. The second objection was stated by the
court:

17

'It is insisted, however, that the tax in the case before us is excessive, and
so excessive as to indicate a purpose on the part of Congress to destroy the
franchise of the bank, and is, therefore, beyond the constitutional power of
Congress.'

To this the court answered:

18

'The first answer to this is that the judicial cannot prescribe to the
legislative departments of the government limitations upon the exercise of its
acknowledged powers. The power to tax may be exercised oppressively upon
persons, but the responsibility of the Legislature is not to the courts, but
to the people by whom its members are elected. So if a particular tax bears
heavily upon a corporation, or a class of corporations, it cannot, for that
reason only, be pronounced contrary to the Constitution.' It will be observed
that the sole objection to the tax here was its excessive character. Nothing
else appeared on the face of the act. It was an increase of a tax admittedly
legal to a higher rate and that was all. There were no elaborate
specifications on the face of the act, as here, indicating the purpose to
regulate matters of state concern and jurisdiction through an exaction so
applied as to give it the qualities of a penalty for violation of law rather
than a tax.

19

It should be noted, too, that the court, speaking of the extent of the taxing
power, used these cautionary words (8 Wall. 541, 19 L. Ed. 482):

20

'There are, indeed, certain virtual limitations, arising from the principles
of the Constitution itself. It would undoubtedly be an abuse of the power if
so exercised as to impair the separate existence and independent self-
government of the states, or if exercised for ends inconsistent with the
limited grants of power in the Constitution.'

21

But more than this, what was charged to be the object of the excessive tax was
within the congressional authority, as appears from the second answer which
the court gave to the objection. After having pointed out the legitimate means
taken by Congress to secure a national medium or currency, the court said (8
Wall. 549, 19 L. Ed. 482):

22

'Having thus, in the exercise of undisputed constitutional powers, undertaken
to provide a currency for the whole country, it cannot be questioned that
Congress may, constitutionally, secure the benefit of it to the people by
appropriate legislation. To this end, Congress has denied the quality of legal
tender to foreign coins, and has provided by law against the imposition of
counterfeit and base coin on the community. To the same end, Congress may
restrain, by suitable enactments, the circulation as money of any notes not
issued under its own authority. Without this power, indeed, its attempts to
secure a sound and uniform currency for the country must be futile.'

23

The next case is that of McCray v. United States, 195 U. S. 27, 24 Sup. Ct.
769, 49 L. Ed. 78, 1 Ann. Cas. 561. That, like the Veazie Bank Case, was the
increase of an excise tax upon a subject properly taxable in which the
taxpayers claimed that the tax had become invalid because the increase was
excessive. It was a tax on oleomargarine, a substitute for butter. The tax on
the white oleomargarine was one-quarter of a cent a pound, and on the yellow
oleomargarine was first 2 cents and was then by the act in question increased
to 10 cents per pound. This court held that the discretion of Congress in the
exercise of its constitutional powers to levy excise taxes could not be
controlled or limited by the courts because the latter might deem the
incidence of the tax oppressive or even destructive. It was the same principle
as that applied in the Veazie Bank Case. This was that Congress, in selecting
its subjects for taxation, might impose the burden where and as it would, and
that a motive disclosed in its selection to discourage sale or manufacture of
an article by a higher tax than on some other did not invalidate the tax. In
neither of these cases did the law objected to show on its face as does the
law before us the detailed specifications of a regulation of a state concern
and business with a heavy exaction to promote the effecicacy of such
regulation.

24

The third case is that of Flint v. Stone Tracy Co., 220 U. S. 107, 31 Sup. Ct.
342, 55 L. Ed. 389, Ann. Cas. 1912B, 1312. It involved the validity of an
excise tax levied on the doing of business by all corporations, joint-stock
companies, associations organized for profit having a capital stock
represented by shares, and insurance companies, and measured the excise by the
net income of the corporations. There was not in that case the slightest doubt
that the tax was a tax, and a tax for revenue, but it was attacked on the
ground that such a tax could be made excessive and thus used by Congress to
destroy the existence of state corporations. To this, this court gave the same
answer as in the Veazie Bank and McCray Cases. It is not so strong an
authority for the government's contention as they are.

25

The fourth case is United States v. Doremus, 249 U. S. 86, 39 Sup. Ct. 214, 63
L. Ed. 493. That involved the validity of the Narcotic Drug Act (38 Stat. 785
[Comp. St. § 6287g et seq.]), which imposed a special tax on the manufacture,
importation and sale or gift of opium or cocoa leaves or their compounds or
derivatives. It required every person subject to the special tax, to register
with the collector of internal revenue his name and place of business and
forbade him to sell except upon the written order of the person to whom the
sale was made on a form prescribed by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue.
The vendor was required to keep the order for two years, and the purchaser to
keep a duplicate for the same time and all were to be subject to official
inspection. Similar requirements were made as to sales upon prescriptions of a
physician and as to the dispensing of such drugs directly to a patient by a
physician. The validity of a special tax in the nature of an excise tax on the
manufacture, importation, and sale of such drugs was, of course, unquestioned.
The provisions for subjecting the sale and distribution of the drugs to
official supervision and inspection were held to have a reasonable relation to
the enforcement of the tax and were therefore held valid.

26

The court said that the act could not be declared invalid just because another
motive than taxation, not shown on the face of the act, might have contributed
to its passage. This case does not militate against the conclusion we have
reached in respect to the law now before us. The court, there, made manifest
its view that the provisions of the so-called taxing act must be naturally and
reasonably adapted to the collection of the tax and not solely to the
achievement of some other purpose plainly within state power.

27

For the reasons given, we must hold the Child Labor Tax Law invalid and the
judgment of the District Court is

28

Affirmed.

29

Mr. Justice CLARKE, dissents.

