294 U.S. 511

55 S.Ct. 497

79 L.Ed. 1032

BALDWIN, Commissioner of Agriculture and Markets, et al.  
v.  
G. A. F. SEELIG, Inc. G. A. F. SEELIG, Inc., v. BALDWIN, Commissioner of
Agriculture and Markets, et al.

Nos. 604 and 605.

Argued Feb. 11, 12, 1935.

Decided March 4, 1935.

Mr. Henry S. Manley, of Albany, N.Y., for Baldwin and others.

[Argument of Counsel from pages 512-515 intentionally omitted]

Messrs. J. Daniel Dougherty and John J. O'Connor, both of New York, for G. A.
F. Seelig, Inc.

[Argument of Counsel from pages 516-518 intentionally omitted]

Mr. Justice CARDOZO delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

Whether and to what extent the New York Milk Control Act (N. Y. Laws 1933, c.
158; Laws 1934, c. 126 (Agriculture and Markets Law N.Y., Consol. Laws, c. 69,
§§ 252--258-r)) may be applied against a dealer who has acquired title to the
milk as the result of a transaction in interstate commerce is the question
here to be determined.

2

G. A. F. Seelig, Inc. (appellee in No. 604 and appellant in No. 605) is
engaged in business as a milk dealer in the city of New York. It buys its
milk, including cream, in Fair Haven, Vt., from the Seelig Creamery
Corporation, which in turn buys from the producers on the neighboring farms.
The milk is transported to New York by rail in 40-quart cans; the daily
shipment amounting to about 200 cans of milk and 20 cans of cream. Upon
arrival in New York about 90 per cent. is sold to customers in the original
cans; the buyers being chiefly hotels, restaurants, and stores. About 10 per
cent. is bottled in New York, and sold to customers in bottles. By concession
title passes from the Seelig Creamery to G. A. F. Seelig, Inc., at Fair Haven,
Vt. For convenience the one company will be referred to as the Creamery and
the other as Seelig.

3

The New York Milk Control Act, with the aid of regulations made thereunder,
has set up a system of minimum prices to be paid by dealers to producers. The
validity of that system in its application to producers doing business in New
York state has supported in our decisions. Nebbia v. New York, 291 U.S. 502,
54 S.Ct. 505, 78 L.Ed. 940, 89 A.L.R. 1469; Hegeman Farms Corporation v.
Baldwin, 293 U.S. 163, 55 S.Ct. 7, 79 L.Ed. 259. Cf. Borden's Farm Products
Co., Inc., v. Baldwin, 293 U.S. 194, 55 S.Ct. 187, 79 L.Ed. 281. From the
farms of New York the inhabitants of the so-called Metropolitan milk district,
comprising the city of New York and certain neighboring communities, derive
about 70 per cent. of the milk requisite for their use. To keep the system
unimpaired by competition from afar, the act has a provision whereby the
protective prices are extended to that part of the supply (about 30 per cent.)
which comes from other states. The substance of the provision is that, so far
as such a prohibition is permitted by the Constitution, there shall be no sale
within the state of milk bought outside unless the price paid to the producers
was one that would be lawful upon a like transaction within the state. The
statute, so far as pertinent, is quoted in the margin, together with
supplementary regulations by the Board of Milk Control.1

4

Seelig buys its milk from the Creamery in Vermont at prices lower than the
minimum payable to producers in New York. The Commissioner of Farms and
Markets refuses to license the transaction of its business unless it signs an
agreement to conform to the New York statute and regulations in the sale of
the imported product.2 This the applicant declines to do. Because of that
refusal other public officers, parties to these appeals, announce a purpose to
prosecute for trading without a license and to recover heavy penalties. This
suit has been brought to restrain the enforcement of the act in its
application to the complainant; repugnancy being charged between its
provisions when so applied and limitations imposed by the Constitution of the
United States. United States Constitution, art. 1, § 8, cl. 3; Fourteenth
Amendment, § 1\. A District Court of three judges, organized in accordance
with section 266 of the Judicial Code (28 U.S.C. § 380 (28 USCA § 380)), has
granted a final decree restraining the enforcement of the act in so far as
sales are made by the complainant while the milk is in the cans or other
original packages in which it was brought into New York, but refusing an
injunction as to milk taken out of the cans for bottling, and thereafter sold
in bottles. See opinion on application for interlocutory injunction, 7 F.Supp.
776; and cf. 293 U.S. 522, 55 S.Ct. 120, 79 L.Ed. ---, October 15, 1934. The
case is here on cross-appeals. 28 U.S.C. § 380 (28 USCA § 380).

5

First. An injunction was properly granted restraining the enforcement of the
act in its application to sales in the original packages.

6

New York has no power to project its legislation into Vermont by regulating
the price to be paid in that state for milk acquired there. So much is not
disputed. New York is equally without power to prohibit the introduction
within her territory of milk of wholesome quality acquired in Vermont, whether
at high prices or at low ones. This again is not disputed. Accepting those
postulates, New York asserts her power to outlaw milk so introduced by
prohibiting its sale thereafter if the price that has been paid for it to the
farmers of Vermont is less than would be owing in like circumstances to
farmers in New York. The importer in that view may keep his milk or drink it,
but sell it he may not.

7

Such a power, if exerted, will set a barrier to traffic between one state and
another as effective as if customs duties, equal to the price differential,
had been laid upon the thing transported. Imposts or duties upon commerce with
other countries are placed, by an express prohibition of the Constitution,
beyond the power of a state, 'except what may be absolutely necessary for
executing its inspection Laws.' Constitution, art. 1, § 10, cl. 2; Woodruff v.
Parham, 8 Wall. 123, 19 L.Ed. 382. Imposts and duties upon interstate commerce
are placed beyond the power of a state, without the mention of an exception,
by the provision committing commerce of that order to the power of the
Congress. Constitution, art. 1, § 8, cl. 3. 'It is the established doctrine of
this court that a state may not, in any form or under any guise, directly
burden the prosecution of interstate business.' International Textbook Co. v.
Pigg, 217 U.S. 91, 112, 30 S.Ct. 481, 487, 54 L.Ed. 678, 27 L.R.A.(N.S.) 493,
18 Ann.Cas. 1103; and see Brennan v. Titusville, 153 U.S. 289, 14 S.Ct. 829,
38 L.Ed. 719; Brown v. Houston, 114 U.S. 622, 5 S.Ct. 1091, 29 L.Ed. 257;
Webber v. Virginia, 103 U.S. 344, 351, 26 L.Ed. 565; Kansas City Southern R.
Co. v. Kaw Valley Drainage District, 233 U.S. 75, 79, 34 S.Ct. 564, 58 L.Ed.
857. Nice distinctions have been made at times between direct and indirect
burdens. They are irrelevant when the avowed purpose of the obstruction, as
well as its necessary tendency, is to suppress or mitigate the consequences of
competition between the states. Such an obstruction is direct by the very
terms of the hypothesis. We are remainded in the opinion below that a chief
occasion of the commerce clauses was 'the mutual jealousies and aggressions of
the States, taking form in customs barriers and other economic retaliation.'
Farrand, Records of the Federal Convention, vol. II, p. 308; vol. III, pp.
478, 547, 548; the Federalist, No. XLII; Curtis, History of the Constitution,
vol. 1, p. 502; Story on the Constitution, § 259\. If New York, in order to
promote the economic welfare of her farmers, may guard them against
competition with the cheaper prices of Vermont, the door has been opened to
rivalries and reprisals that were meant to be averted by subjecting commerce
between the states to the power of the nation.

8

The argument is pressed upon us, however, that the end to be served by the
Milk Control Act is something more than the economic welfare of the farmers or
of any other class or classes. The end to be served is the maintenance of a
regular and adequate supply of pure and wholesome milk; the supply being put
in jeopardy when the farmers of the state are unable to earn a living income.
Nebbia v. New York, supra. Price security, we are told, is only a special form
of sanitary security; the economic motive is secondary and subordinate; the
state intervenes to make its inhabitants healthy, and not to make them rich.
On that assumption we are asked to say that intervention will be upheld as a
valid exercise by the state of its internal police power, though there is an
incidental obstruction to commerce between one state and another. This would
be to eat up the rule under the guise of an exception. Economic welfare is
always related to health, for there can be no health if men are starving. Let
such an exception be admitted, and all that a state will have to do in times
of stress and strain is to say that its farmers and merchants and workmen must
be protected against competition from without, lest they go upon the poor
relief lists or perish altogether. To give entrance to that excuse would be to
invite a speedy end of our national solidarity. The Constitution was framed
under the dominion of a political philosophy less parochial in range. It was
framed upon the theory that the peoples of the several states must sink or
swim together, and that in the long run prosperity and salvation are in union
and not division.

9

We have dwelt up to this point upon the argument of the state that economic
security for farmers in the milk shed may be a means of assuring to consumers
a steady supply of a food of prime necessity. There is, however, another
argument which seeks to establish a relation between the well-being of the
producer and the quality of the product. We are told that farmers who are
underpaid will be tempted to save the expense or sanitary precautions. This
temptation will affect the farmers outside New York as well as those within
it. For that reason, the exclusion of milk paid for in Vermont below the New
York minimum will tend, it is said, to impose a higher standard of quality and
thereby promote health. We think the argument will not avail to justify
impediments to commerce between the states. There is neither evidence nor
presumption that the same minimum prices established by order of the board for
producers in New York are necessary also for producers in Vermont. But apart
from such defects of proof, the evils springing from uncared for cattle must
be remedied by measures of repression more direct and certain than the
creation of a parity of prices between New York and other states. Appropriate
certificates may be exacted from farmers in Vermont and elsewhere (Mintz v.
Baldwin, 289 U.S. 346, 53 S.Ct. 611, 77 L.Ed. 1245; Reid v. Colorado, 187 U.S.
137, 23 S.Ct. 92, 47 L.Ed. 108); milk may be excluded if necessary safeguards
have been omitted; but commerce between the states is burdened unduly when one
state regulates by indirection the prices to be paid to producers in another,
in the faith that augmentation of prices will lift up the level of economic
welfare, and that this will stimulate the observance of sanitary requirements
in the preparation of the product. The next step would be to condition
importation upon proof of a satisfactory wage scale in factory or shop, or
even upon proof of the profits of the business. Whatever relation there may be
between earnings and sanitation is too remote and indirect to justify
obstructions to the normal flow of commerce in its movement between states.
Cf. Asbell v. Kansas, 209 U.S. 251, 256, 28 S.Ct. 485, 52 L.Ed. 778, 14
Ann.Cas. 1101; Hannibal & St. J. Railroad Co. v. Husen, 95 U.S. 465, 472, 24
L.Ed. 527. One state may not put pressure of that sort upon others to reform
their economic standards. If farmers or manufacturers in Vermont are
abandoning farms or factories, or are failing to maintain them properly, the
Legislature of Vermont and not that of New York must supply the fitting
remedy.

10

Many cases from our reports are cited by counsel for the state. They do not
touch the case at hand. The line of division between direct and indirect
restraints of commerce involves in its marking a reference to considerations
of degree. Even so, the borderland is wide between the restraints upheld as
incidental and those attempted here. Subject to the paramount power of the
Congress, a state may regulate the importation of unhealthy swine or cattle
(Asbell v. Kansas, supra; Mintz v. Baldwin, supra) or decayed or noxious
foods. Crossman v. Lurman, 192 U.S. 189, 24 S.Ct. 234, 48 L.Ed. 401; Savage v.
Jones, 225 U.S. 501, 32 S.Ct. 715, 56 L.Ed. 1182; Price v. Illinois, 238 U.S.
446, 35 S.Ct. 892, 59 L.Ed. 1400. Things such as these are not proper subjects
of commerce, and there is no unreasonable interference when they are inspected
and excluded. So a state may protect its inhabitants against the fraudulent
substitution, by deceptive coloring or otherwise, of one article for another.
Plumley v. Massachusetts, 155 U.S. 461, 15 S.Ct. 154, 39 L.Ed. 223; Hebe Co.
v. Shaw, 248 U.S. 297, 39 S.Ct. 125, 63 L.Ed. 255; Hygrade Provision Co. v.
Sherman, 266 U.S. 497, 45 S.Ct. 141, 69 L.Ed. 402. It may give protection to
travelers against the dangers of overcrowded highways (Bradley v. Public
Utilities Commission, 289 U.S. 92, 53 S.Ct. 577, 77 L.Ed. 1053, 85 A.L.R.
1131) and protection to its residents against unnecessary noises. Hennington
v. Georgia, 163 U.S. 299, 16 S.Ct. 1086, 41 L.Ed. 166. Cf., however, Missouri,
Kansas & Texas R. Co. v. Texas, 245 U.S. 484, 488, 38 S.Ct. 178, 62 L.Ed. 419,
L.R.A. 1918C, 535. At times there are border cases, such as People of State of
New York ex rel. Silz v. Hesterberg, 211 U.S. 31, 29 S.Ct. 10, 53 L.Ed. 75,
where the decision in all likelihood was influenced, even if it is not wholly
explained, by a recognition of the special and restricted nature of rights of
property in game. Interference was there permitted with sale and importation,
but interference for a closed season and no longer, and in aid of a policy of
conservation common to many states. Cf. Geer v. Connecticut, 161 U.S. 519, 16
S.Ct. 600, 40 L.Ed. 793; Foster-Fountain Packing Co. v. Haydel, 278 U.S. 1,
11, 49 S.Ct. 1, 73 L.Ed. 147; People ex rel. Silz v. Hesterberg, 184 N.Y. 126,
131, 76 N.E. 1032, 3 L.R.A.(N.S.) 163, 128 Am.St.Rep. 528, 6 Ann.Cas. 353.
None of these statutes--inspection laws, game laws, laws intended to curb
fraud or exterminate disease--approaches in drastic quality the statute here
in controversy which would neutralize the economic consequences of free trade
among the states.

11

Second. There was error in refusing an injunction to restrain the enforcement
of the act in its application to milk in bottles to be sold by the importer.

12

The test of the 'original package,' which came into our law with Brown v.
Maryland, 12 Wheat. 419, 6 L.Ed. 678, is not inflexible and final for the
transactions of interstate commerce, whatever may be its validity for commerce
with other countries. Cf. Woodruff v. Parham, supra; Anglo-Chilean Nitrate
Sales Corp. v. Alabama, 288 U.S. 218, 226, 53 S.Ct. 373, 77 L.Ed. 710. There
are purposes for which merchandise, transported from another state, will be
treated as a part of the general mass of property at the state of destination
though still in the original containers. This is so, for illustration, where
merchandise so contained is subjected to a nondiscriminatory property tax
which it bears equally with other merchandise produced within the state.
Sonneborn Bros. v. Cureton, 262 U.S. 506, 43 S.Ct. 643, 67 L.Ed. 1095; Texas
Co. v. Brown, 258 U.S. 466, 475, 42 S.Ct. 375, 66 L.Ed. 721; American Steel &
Wire Co. v. Speed, 192 U.S. 500, 24 S.Ct. 365, 48 L.Ed. 538. There are other
purposes for which the same merchandise will have the benefit of the
protection appropriate to interstate commerce, though the original packages
have been broken and the contents subdivided. 'A state tax upon merchandise
brought in from another state or upon its sales, whether in original packages
or not, after it has reached its destination and is in a state of rest, is
lawful only when the tax is not discriminating in its incidence against the
merchandise because of its origin in another state.' Sonneborn Bros. v.
Cureton, supra, at page 516 of 262 U.S., 43 S.Ct. 643, 646. Cf. McDermott v.
Wisconsin, 228 U.S. 115, 133, 33 S.Ct. 431, 57 L.Ed. 754, 47 L.R.A.(N.S.) 984,
Ann.Cas. 1915A, 39; Bowman v. Chicago & N.W.R. Co., 125 U.S. 465, 491, 8 S.Ct.
689, 1062, 31 L.Ed. 700; Brimmer v. Rebman, 138 U.S. 78, 11 S.Ct. 213, 35
L.Ed. 862; Savage v. Jones, supra, at page 525 of 225 U.S., 32 S.Ct. 715;
Western Union Tel. Co. v. Foster, 247 U.S. 105, 114, 38 S.Ct. 438, 62 L.Ed.
1006;, 1 A.L.R. 1278; Pacific Co. v. Johnson, 285 U.S. 480, 493, 52 S.Ct. 424,
76 L.Ed. 893. In brief, the test of the original package is not an ultimate
principle. It is an illustration of a principle. Pennsylvania Gas Co. v.
Public Service Commission, 225 N.Y. 397, 403, 122 N.E. 260. It marks a
convenient boundary, and one sufficiently precise save in exceptional
conditions. What is ultimate is the principle that one state in its dealings
with another may not place itself in a position of economic isolation.
Formulas and catchwords are subordinate to this overmastering requirement.
Neither the power to tax nor the police power may be used by the state of
destination with the aim and effect of establishing an economic barrier
against competition with the products of another state or the labor of its
residents. Restrictions so contrived are an unreasonable clog upon the
mobility of commerce. They set up what is equivalent to a rampart of customs
duties designed to neutralize advantages belonging to the place of origin.
They are thus hostile in conception as well as burdensome in result. The form
of the packages in such circumstances is immaterial, whether they are original
or broken. The importer must be free from imposts framed for the very purpose
of suppressing competition from without and leading inescapably to the
suppression so intended.

13

The statute here in controversy will not survive that test. A dealer in milk
buys it in Vermont at prices there prevailing. He brings it to New York, and
is told he may not sell it if he removes it from the can and pours it into
bottles. He may not do this for the reason that milk in Vermont is cheaper
than milk in New York at the regimented prices, and New York is moved by the
desire to protect her inhabitants from the cut prices and other consequences
of Vermont competition. To overcome that competition a common incident of
ownership, the privilege of sale in convenient receptacles, is denied to one
who has bought in interstate commerce. He may not sell on any terms to any
one, whether the orders were given in advance or came to him thereafter. The
decisions of this court as to the significance of the original package in
interstate transactions were not meant to be a cover for retortion or
suppression.

14

The distinction is clear between a statute so designed and statutes of the
type considered in Leisy v. Hardin, 135 U.S. 100, 10 S.Ct. 681, 34 L.Ed. 128,
to take one example out of many available. By the teaching of that decision
intoxicating liquors are not subject to license or prohibition by the state of
destination without congressional consent.3 They become subject, however, to
such laws when the packages are broken. There is little, if any, analogy
between restrictions of that type and those in controversy here. In licensing
or prohibiting the sale of intoxicating liquors a state does not attempt to
neutralize economic advantages belonging to the place of origin. What it does
is no more than to apply its domestic policy, rooted in its conceptions of
morality and order, to property which for such a purpose may fairly be deemed
to have passed out of commerce and to be commingled in an absorbing mass. So,
also, the analogy is remote between restrictions like the present ones upon
the sale of imported milk and restrictions affecting sales in unsanitary
sweat-shops. It is one thing for a state to exact adherence by an importer to
fitting standards of sanitation before the products of the farm or factory may
be sold in its markets. It is a very different thing to establish a wage scale
or a sacle of prices for use in other states, and to bar the sale of the
products, whether in the original packages or in others, unless the scale has
been observed.

15

The decree in No. 604 is affirmed, and that in No. 605 reversed, and the cause
remanded for proceedings in accordance with this opinion.

16

It is so ordered.

1

Section 258-m(4), article 21-A, New York Agriculture and Markets Law, Laws
1934, c. 126, formerly section 312(g), article 25, Laws 1933, c. 158: 'It is
the intent of the legislature that the instant, whenever that may be, that the
handling within the state by a milk dealer of milk produced outside of the
state becomes a subject of regulation by the state, in the exercise of its
police powers, the restrictions set forth in this article respecting such milk
so produced shall apply and the powers conferred by this article shall attach.
After any such milk so produced shall have come to rest within the state, any
sale, within the state by a licensed milk dealer or a milk dealer required by
this article to be licensed, of any such milk purchased from the producer at a
price lower than that required to be paid for milk produced within the state
purchased under similar conditions, shall be unlawful.'

Order of New York Milk Control Board, July 1, 1933: 'Any continuous and
regular purchase or sale or delivery or receipt of milk passing to a milk
dealer at any place and available for utilization as fluid milk and/or cream
within New York State, followed by such utilization in one or more instances,
where the price involved in such purchase or sale or delivery or receipt is
less than the sum of the minimum price established to be paid to producers for
such milk plus actual costs of transporting and handling and processing such
milk to the place and to the condition involved in such purchase or sale or
delivery or receipt, hereby is forbidden.'

2

The application blank contains the following questions which show the form of
the required agreement: 'Do you agree not to sell within New York State after
it has come to rest within the State, milk or cream purchased from producers
without the State at a price lower than that required to be paid producers for
milk or cream produced within the State purchased under similar conditions?'

'Do you agree that you will obtain for the Commissioner and supply to him, at
such times and in such manner as he requires, concerning milk and cream
produced without the State and in any way dealt in by you, data to whatever
extent is necessary to ascertain or compute whether the producers were paid
for such milk or cream a price not lower than that required to be paid
producers for milk or cream produced within New York State and purchased under
similar conditions?'

3

The rule is different today under the Twenty-First Amendment. Article 21, § 2.

