395 U.S. 444

89 S.Ct. 1827

23 L.Ed.2d 430

Clarence BRANDENBURG, Appellant,  
v.  
State of OHIO.

No. 492.

Argued Feb. 27, 1969.

Decided June 9, 1969.

Allen Brown, Cincinnati, Ohio, for appellant.

Leonard Kirschner, Cincinnati, Ohio, for appellee.

PER CURIAM.

1

The appellant, a leader of a Ku Klux Klan group, was convicted under the Ohio
Criminal Syndicalism statute for 'advocat(ing) * * * the duty, necessity, or
propriety of crime, sabotage, violence, or unlawful methods of terrorism as a
means of accomplishing industrial or political reform' and for 'voluntarily
assembl(ing) with any society, group, or assemblage of persons formed to teach
or advocate the doctrines of criminal syndicalism.' Ohio Rev. Code Ann. §
2923.13. He was fined $1,000 and sentenced to one to 10 years' imprisonment.
The appellant challenged the consitutionality of the criminal syndicalism
statute under the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States
Constitution, but the intermediate appellate court of Ohio affirmed his
conviction without opinion. The Supreme Court of Ohio dismissed his appeal,
sua sponte, 'for the reason that no substantial constitutional question exists
herein.' It did not file an opinion or explain its conclusions. Appeal was
taken to this Court, and we noted probable jurisdiction. 393 U.S. 948, 89
S.Ct. 377, 21 L.Ed.2d 360 (1968). We reverse.

2

The record shows that a man, identified at trial as the appellant, telephoned
an announcer-reporter on the staff of a Cincinnati television station and
invited him to come to a Ku Klux Klan 'rally' to be held at a farm in Hamilton
County. With the cooperation of the organizers, the reporter and a cameraman
attended the meeting and filmed the events. Portions of the films were later
broadcast on the local station and on a national network.

3

The prosecution's case rested on the films and on testimony identifying the
appellant as the person who communicated with the reporter and who spoke at
the rally. The State also introduced into evidence several articles appearing
in the film, including a pistol, a rifle, a shotgun, ammunition, a Bible, and
a red hood worn by the speaker in the films.

4

One film showed 12 hooded figures, some of whom carried firearms. They were
gathered around a large wooden cross, which they burned. No one was present
other than the participants and the newsmen who made the film. Most of the
words uttered during the scene were incomprehensible when the film was
projected, but scattered phrases could be understood that were derogatory of
Negroes and, in one instance, of Jews.1 Another scene on the same film showed
the appellant, in Klan regalia, making as peech. The speech, in full, was as
follows:

5

'This is an organizers' meeting. We have had quite a few members here today
which are--we have hundreds, hundreds of members throughout the State of Ohio.
I can quote from a newspaper clipping from the Columbus, Ohio Dispatch, five
weeks ago Sunday morning. The Klan has more members in the State of Ohio than
does any other organization. We're not a revengent organization, but if our
President, our Congress, our Supreme Court, continues to suppress the white,
Caucasian race, it's possible that there might have to be some revengeance
taken.

6

'We are marching on Congress July the Fourth, four hundred thousand strong.
From there we are dividing into two groups, one group to march on St.
Augustine, Florida, the other group to march into Mississippi. Thank you.' The
second film showed six hooded figures one of whom, later identified as the
appellant, repeated a speech very similar to that recorded on the first film.
The reference to the possibility of 'revengeance' was omitted, and one
sentence was added: 'Personally, I believe the nigger should be returned to
Africa, the Jew returned to Israel.' Though some of the figures in the films
carried weapons, the speaker did not.

7

The Ohio Criminal Syndicalism Statute was enacted in 1919. From 1917 to 1920,
identical or quite similar laws were adopted by 20 States and two territories.
E. Dowell, A History of Criminal Syndicalism Legislation in the United States
21 (1939). In 1927, this Court sustained the constitutionality of California's
Criminal Syndicalism Act, Cal. Penal Code §§ 11400--11402, the text of which
is quite similar to that of the laws of Ohio. Whitney v. California, 274 U.S.
357, 47 S.Ct. 641, 71 L.Ed. 1095 (1927). The Court upheld the statute on the
ground that, without more, 'advocating' violent means to effect political and
economic change involves such danger to the security of the State that the
State may outlaw it. Cf. Fiske v. Kansas, 274 U.S. 380, 47 S.Ct. 655, 71 L.Ed.
1108 (1927). But Whitney has been thoroughly discredited by later decisions.
See Dennis v. United States, 341 U.S. 494, at 507, 71 S.Ct. 857, at 866, 95
L.Ed. 1137 (1951). These later decisions have fashioned the principle that the
constitutional guarantees of free speech and free press do not permit a State
to forbid or proscribe advocacy of the use of force or of law violation except
where such advocacy is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless
action and is likely to incite or produce such action.2 As we said in Noto v.
United States, 367 U.S. 290, 297--298, 81 S.Ct. 1517, 1520--1521, 6 L.Ed.2d
836 (1961), 'the mere abstract teaching * * * of the moral propriety or even
moral necessity for a resort to force and violence, is not the same as
preparing a group for violent action and steeling it to such action.' See also
Herndon v. Lowry, 301 U.S. 242, 259--261, 57 S.Ct. 732, 739--740, 81 L.Ed.
1066 (1937); Bond v. Floyd, 385 U.S. 116, 134, 87 S.Ct. 339, 348, 17 L.Ed.2d
235 (1966). A statute which fails to draw this distinction impermissibly
intrudes upon the freedoms guaranteed by the First and Fourteenth Amendments.
It sweeps within its condemnation speech which our Constitution has immunized
from governmental control. Cf. Yates v. United States, 354 U.S. 298, 77 S.Ct.
1064, 1 L.Ed.2d 1356 (1957); De Jonge v. Oregon, 299 U.S. 353, 57 S.Ct. 255,
81 L.Ed. 278 (1937); Stromberg v. California, 283 U.S. 359, 51 S.Ct. 532, 75
L.Ed. 1117 (1931). See also United Stats v. Robel, 389 U.S. 258, 88 S.Ct. 419,
19 L.Ed.2d 508 (1967); Keyishian v. Board of Regents, 385 U.S. 589, 87 S.Ct.
675, 17 L.Ed.2d 629 (1967); Elfbrandt v. Russell, 384 U.S. 11, 86 S.Ct. 1238,
16 L.Ed.2d 321 (1966); Aptheker v. Secretary of State, 378 U.S. 500, 84 S.Ct.
1659, 12 L.Ed.2d 992 (1964); Baggett v. Bullitt, 377 U.S. 360, 84 S.Ct. 1316,
12 L.Ed.2d 377 (1964).

8

Measured by this test, Ohio's Criminal Syndicalism Act cannot be sustained.
The Act punishes persons who 'advocate or teach the duty, necessity, or
propriety' of violence 'as a means of accomplishing industrial or political
reform'; or who publish or circulate or display any book or paper containing
such advocacy; or who 'justify' the commission of violent acts 'with intent to
exemplify, spread or advocate the propriety of the doctrines of criminal
syndicalism'; or who 'voluntarily assemble' with a group formed 'to teach or
advocate the doctrines of criminal syndicalism.' Neither the indictment nor
the trial judge's instructions to the jury in any way refined the statute's
bald definition of the crime in terms of mere advocacy not distinguished from
incitement to imminent lawless action.3

9

Accordingly, we are here confronted with a statute which, by its own words and
as applied, purports to punish mere advocacy and to forbid, on pain of
criminal punishment, assembly with others merely to advocate the described
type of action.4 Such a statute falls within the condemnation of the First and
Fourteenth Amendments. The contrary teaching of Whitney v. California, supra,
cannot be supported, and that decision is therefore overruled.

10

Mr. Justice BLACK, concurring.

11

I agree with the views expressed by Mr. Justice DOUGLAS in his concurring
opinion in this case that the 'clear and present danger' doctrine should have
no place in the interpretatio of the First Amendment. I join the Court's
opinion, which, as I understand it, simply cites Dennis v. United States, 341
U.S. 494, 71 S.Ct. 857, 95 L.Ed. 1137 (1951), but does not indicate any
agreement on the Court's part with the 'clear and present danger' doctrine on
which Dennis purported to rely.

12

Mr. Justice DOUGLAS, concurring.

13

While I join the opinion of the Court, I desire to enter a caveat.

14

The 'clear and present danger' test was adumbrated by Mr. Justice Holmes in a
case arising during World War I--a war 'declared' by the Congress, not by the
Chief Executive. The case was Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47, 52, 39
S.Ct. 247, 249, 63 L.Ed. 470, where the defendant was charged with attempts to
cause insubordination in the military and obstruction of enlistment. The
pamphlets that were distributed urged resistance to the draft, denounced
conscription, and impugned the motives of those backing the war effort. The
First Amendment was tendered as a defense. Mr. Justice Holmes in rejecting
that defense said:

15

'The question in every case is whether the words used are used in such
circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear and present danger
that they will bring about the substantive evils that Congress has a right to
prevent. It is a question of proximity and degree.'

16

Frohwerk v. United States, 249 U.S. 204, 39 S.Ct. 249, 63 L.Ed. 561, also
authored by Mr. Justice Holmes, involved prosecution and punishment for
publication of articles very critical of the war effort in World War I.
Schenck was referred to as a conviction for obstructing security 'by words of
persuasion.' Id., at 206, 39 S.Ct. at 250. And the conviction in Frohwerk was
sustained because 'the circulation of the paper was in quarters where a little
breath would be enough to kindle a flame.' Id., at 209, 39 S.Ct., at 251.

17

Debs v. United States, 249 U.S. 211, 39 S.Ct. 252, 63 L.Ed. 566, was the third
of the trilogy of the 1918 Term. Debs was convicted of speaking in opposition
to the war where his 'opposition was so expressed that its natural and
intended effect would be to obstruct recruiting.' Id., at 215, 39 S.Ct. at
253.

18

'If that was intended and if, in all the circumstances, that would be its
probable effect, it would not be protected by reason of its being part of a
general program in expressions of a general and conscientious belief.' Ibid.

19

In the 1919 Term, the Court applied the Schenck doctrine to affirm the
convictions of other dissidents in World War I. Abrams v. United States, 250
U.S. 616, 40 S.Ct. 17, 63 L.Ed. 1173, was one instance. Mr. Justice Holmes,
with whom Mr. Justice Brandeis concurred, dissented. While adhering to
Schenck, he did not think that on the facts a case for overriding the First
Amendment had been made out:

20

'It is only the present danger of immediate evil or an intent to bring it
about that warrants Congress in setting a limit to the expression of opinion
where private rights are not concerned. Congress certainly cannot forbid all
effort to change the mind of the country.' 250 U.S., at 628, 40 S.Ct., at 21.

21

Another instance was Schaefer v. United States, 251 U.S. 466, 40 S.Ct. 259, 64
L.Ed. 360, in which Mr. Justice Brandeis, joined by Mr. Justice Holmes,
dissented. A third was Pierce v. United States, 252 U.S. 239, 40 S.Ct. 205, 64
L.Ed. 542, in which again Mr. Justice Brandeis, joined by Mr. Justice Holmes,
dissented.

22

Those, then, were the World War I cases that put the gloss of 'clear and
present danger' on the First Amendment. Whether the war power--the greatest
leveler of them all--is adequate to sustain that doctrine is debatable. The
dissents in Abrams, Schaefer, and Pierce show how easily 'clear and present
danger' is manipulated to crush what Brandeis called '(t)he fundamental right
of free men to strive for better conditions through new legislation and new
institutions' by argument and discourse (Pierce v. United States, supra, at
273, 40 S.Ct. at 217) even in time of war. Though I doubt if the c lear and
present danger' test is congenial to the First Amendment in time of a declared
war, I am certain it is not reconcilable with the First Amendment in days of
peace.

23

The Court quite properly overrules Whitney v. California, 274 U.S. 357, 47
S.Ct. 641, 71 L.Ed. 1095, which involved advocacy of ideas which the majority
of the Court deemed unsound and dangerous.

24

Mr. Justice Holmes, though never formally abandoning the 'clear and present
danger' test, moved closer to the First Amendment ideal when he said in
dissent in Gitlow (Gitlow v. People of State of New York, 268 U.S. 652, 45
S.Ct. 626, 69 L.Ed. 1138):

25

'Every idea is an incitement. It offers itself for belief and if believed it
is acted on unless some other belief outweighs it or some failure of energy
stifles the movement at its birth. The only difference between the expression
of an opinion and an incitement in the narrower sense is the speaker's
enthusiasm for the result. Eloquence may set fire to reason. But whatever may
be thought of the redundant discourse before us it had no chance of starting a
present conflagration. If in the long run the beliefs expressed in proletarian
dictatorship are destined to be accepted by the dominant forces of the
community, the only meaning of free speech is that they should be given their
chance and have their way.'

26

We have never been faithful to the philosophy of that dissent.

27

The Court in Herndon v. Lowry, 301 U.S. 242, 57 S.Ct. 732, 81 L.Ed. 1066,
overturned a conviction for exercising First Amendment rights to incite
insurrection because of lack of evidence of incitement. Id., at 259--261, 57
S.Ct., at 739--740\. And see Hartzel v. United States, 322 U.S. 680, 64 S.Ct.
1233, 88 L.Ed. 1534. In Bridges v. California, 314 U.S. 252, 261--263, 62
S.Ct. 190, 192 194, 86 L.Ed. 192, we approved the 'clear and present danger'
test in an elaborate dictum that tightened it and confined it to a narrow
category. But in Dennis v. United States, 341 U.S. 494, 71 S.Ct. 857, 95 L.Ed.
1137, we opened wide the door, distorting the 'clear and present danger' test
beyond recognition.1

28

In that case the prosecution dubbed an agreement to teach the Marxist creed a
'conspiracy.' The case was submitted to a jury on a charge that the jury could
not convict unless it found that the defendants 'intended to overthrow the
Government 'as speedily as circumstances would permit." Id., at 509--511, 71
S.Ct., at 867. The Court sustained convictions under the charge, construing it
to mean a determination of "whether the gravity of the 'evil,' discounted by
its improbability, justifies such invasion of free speech as is necessary to
avoid the danger."2 Id., at 510, 71 S.Ct., at 868, quoting from United States
v. Dennis, 183 F.2d 201, 212.

29

Out of the 'clear and present danger' test came other offspring. Advocacy and
teaching of forcible overthrow of government as an abstract principle is
immune from prosecution. Yates v. United States, 354 U.S. 298, 318, 77 S.Ct.
1064, 1076, 1 L.Ed.2d 1356. But an 'active' member, who has a guilty knowledge
and intent of the aim to overthrow the Government by violence, Noto v. United
States, 367 U.S. 290, 81 S.Ct. 1517, 6 L.Ed.2d 836, may be prosecuted. Scales
v. United States, 367 U.S. 203, 228, 81 S.Ct. 1469, 1485, 6 L.Ed.2d 782. And
the power to investigate, backed by the powerful sanction of contempt,
includes the power to determine which of the two categories fits the
particular witness. Barenblatt v. United States, 360 U.S. 109, 130, 79 S.Ct.
1081, 1094, 3 L.Ed.2d 1115. And so the investigator roams at will through all
of the beliefs of the witness, ransacking his conscience and his innermost
thoughts.

30

JudgeL earned Hand, who wrote for the Court of Appeals in affirming the
judgment in Dennis, coined the 'not improbable' test, United States v. Dennis,
2 Cir., 183 F.2d 201, 214, which this Court adopted and which Judge Hand
preferred over the 'clear and present danger' test. Indeed, in his book, The
Bill of Rights 59 (1958), in referring to Holmes' creation of the 'clear and
present danger' test, he said, 'I cannot help thinking that for once Homer
nodded.'

31

My own view is quite different. I see no place in the regime of the First
Amendment for any 'clear and present danger' test, whether strict and tight as
some would make it, or free-wheeling as the Court in Dennis rephrased it.

32

When one reads the opinions closely and sees when and how the 'clear and
present danger' test has been applied, great misgivings are aroused. First,
the threats were often loud but always puny and made serious only by judges so
wedded to the status quo that critical analysis made them nervous. Second, the
test was so twisted and perverted in Dennis as to make the trial of those
teachers of Marxism an all-out political trial which was part and parcel of
the cold war that has eroded substantial parts of the First Amendment.

33

Action is often a method of expression and within the protection of the First
Amendment.

34

Suppose one tears up his own copy of the Constitution in eloquent protest to a
decision of this Court. May he be indicted?

35

Suppose one rips his own Bible to shreds to celebrate his departure from one
'faith' and his embrace of atheism. May he be indicted?

36

Last Term the Court held in United States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367, 382, 88
S.Ct. 1673, 1682, 20 L.Ed.2d 672, that a registrant under Selective Service
who burned his draft card in protest of the war in Vietnam could be
prosecuted. The First Amendment was tendered as a defense and rejected, the
Court saying:

37

'The issuance of certificates indicating the registration and eligibility
classification of individuals is a legitimate and substantial administrative
aid in the functioning of this system. And legislation to insure the
continuing availability of issued certificates serves a legitimate and
substantial purpose in the system's administration.' 391 U.S., at 377 378, 88
S.Ct., at 1679.

38

But O'Brien was not prosecuted for not having his draft card available when
asked for by a federal agent. He was indicted, tried and convicted for burning
the card. And this Court's affirmance of that conviction was not, with all
respect, consistent with the First Amendment.

39

The act of praying often involves body posture and movement as well as
utterances. It is nonetheless protected by the Free Exercise Clause.
Picketing, as we have said on numerous occasions, is 'free speech plus.' See
Bakery and Pastry Drivers and Helpers Local 802 of International Brotherhood
of Teamsters v. Wohl, 315 U.S. 769, 775, 62 S.Ct. 816, 819, 86 L.Ed. 1178
(Douglas, J., concurring); Giboney v. Empire Storage Co., 336 U.S. 490, 501,
69 S.Ct. 684, 690, 93 L.Ed. 834; Hughes v. Superior Court, 339 U.S. 460, 465,
70 S.Ct. 718, 721, 94 L.Ed. 985; National Labor Relations Board v. Fruit and
Vegetable Packers, 377 U.S. 58, 77, 84 S.Ct. 1063, 1073, 12 L.Ed.2d 129
(Black, J., concurring), and id., at 93, 84 S.Ct. at 1081 (Harlan, J.,
dissenting); Cox v. Louisiana, 379 U.S. 559, 578, 85 S.Ct. 466, 468, 476, 13
L.Ed.2d 487 (opinion of Black, J.); Amalgamated Food Employees v. Logan Plaza,
391 U.S. 308, 326, 88 S.Ct. 1601, 1612, 20 L.Ed.2d 603 (Douglas, J.,
concurring). That means that it can be regulated when it comes to the 'plus'
or 'action' side of the protest. It can be regulated as to the number of
pickets and the place and hours (see Cox v. Louisiana, supra), because traffic
and other community problems would otherwise suffer.

40

But none of these considerations are implicated in the symbolic protest of the
Vietnam war in the burning of a draft card.

41

One's beliefs have long been thought to be sanctuaries which government could
not invade. Br enblatt is one example of the ease with which that sanctuary
can be violated. The lines drawn by the Court between the criminal act of
being an 'active' Communist and the innocent act of being a nominal or
inactive Communist mark the difference only between deep and abiding belief
and casual or uncertain belief. But I think that all matters of belief are
beyond the reach of subpoenas or the probings of investigators. That is why
the invasions of privacy made by investigating committees were notoriously
unconstitutional. That is the deep-seated fault in the infamous loyalty-
security hearings which, since 1947 when President Truman launched them, have
processed 20,000,000 men and women. Those hearings were primarily concerned
with one's thoughts, ideas, beliefs, and convictions. They were the most
blatant violations of the First Amendment we have ever known.

42

The line between what is permissible and not subject to control and what may
be made impermissible and subject to regulation is the line between ideas and
overt acts.

43

The example usually given by those who would punish speech is the case of one
who falsely shouts fire in a crowded theatre.

44

This is, however, a classic case where speech is brigaded with action. See
Speiser v. Randall, 357 U.S. 513, 536--537, 78 S.Ct. 1332, 1346, 2 L.Ed.2d
1460 (Douglas, J., concurring.) They are indeed inseparable and a prosecution
can be launched for the overt acts actually caused. Apart from rare instances
of that kind, speech is, I think, immune from prosecution. Certainly there is
no constitutional line between advocacy of abstract ideas as in Yates and
advocacy of political action as in Scales. The quality of advocacy turns on
the depth of the conviction; and government has no power to invade that
sanctuary of belief and conscience.3

1

The significant portions that could be understood were:

'How far is the nigger going to--yeah.'

'This is what we are going to do to the niggers.'

'A dirty nigger.'

'Send the Jews back to Israel.'

'Let's give them back to the dark garden.'

'Save America.'

'Let's go back to constitutional betterment.'

'Bury the niggers.'

'We intend to do our part.'

'Give us our state rights.'

'Freedom for the whites.'

'Nigger will have to fight for every inch he gets from now on.'

2

It was on the theory that the Smith Act, 54 Stat. 670, 18 U.S.C. § 2385,
embodied such a principle and that it had been applied only in conformity with
it that this Court sustained the Act's constitutionality. Dennis v. United
States, 341 U.S. 494, 71 S.Ct. 857, 95 L.Ed. 1137 (1951). That this was the
basis for Dennis was emphasized in Yates v. United States, 354 U.S. 298, 320
324, 77 S.Ct. 1064, 1077--1079, 1 L.Ed.2d 1356 (1957), in which the Court
overturned convictions for advocacy of the forcible overthrow of the
Government under the Smith Act, because the trial judge's instructions had
allowed conviction for mere advocacy, unrelated to its tendency to produce
forcible action.

3

The first count of the indictment charged that appellant 'did unlawfully by
word of mouth advocate the necessity, or propriety of crime, violence, or
unlawful methods of terrorism as a means of accomplishing political reform * *
*.' The second count charged that appellant 'did unlawfully voluntarily
assemble with a group or assemblage of persons formed to advocate the
doctrines of criminal syndicalism * * *.' The trial judge's charge merely
followed the language of the indictment. No construction of the statute by the
Ohio courts has brought it within constitutionally permissible limits. The
Ohio Supreme Court has considered the statute in only one previous case, State
v. Kassay, 126 Ohio St. 177, 184 N.E. 521 (1932), where the constitutionality
of the statute was sustained.

4

Statutes affecting the right of assembly, like those touching on freedom of
speech, must observe the established distinctions between mere advocacy and
incitement to imminent lawless action, for as Chief Justice Hughes wrote in De
Jonge v. Oregon, supra, 299 U.S. at 364, 57 S.Ct. at 260: 'The right of
peaceable assembly is a right cognate to those of free speech and free press
and is equally fundamental.' See also United States v. Cruikshank, 92 U.S.
542, 552, 23 L.Ed. 588 (1876); Hague v. CIO, 307 U.S. 496, 513, 519, 59 S.Ct.
954, 963, 965, 83 L.Ed. 1423 (1939); NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357
U.S. 449, 460--461, 78 S.Ct. 1163, 1170--1171, 2 L.Ed.2d 1488 (1958).

1

See McKay, The Preference For Freedom, 34 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 1182, 1203--1212
(1959).

2

See Feiner v. New York, 340 U.S. 315, 71 S.Ct. 303, 95 L.Ed. 295, where a
speaker was arrested for arousing an audience when the only 'clear and present
danger' was that the hecklers in the audience would break up the meeting.

3

See Mr. Justice Black, dissenting, in American Communications Assn. C.I.O. v.
Douds, 339 U.S. 382, 446, 449, 70 S.Ct. 674, 707, 709, 94 L.Ed. 925 et seq.

