520 U.S. 681  
117 S.Ct. 1636  
137 L.Ed.2d 945  

William Jefferson CLINTON, Petitioner,  
v.  
Paula Corbin JONES.

No. 95-1853.

Supreme Court of the United States

Argued Jan. 13, 1997.

Decided May 27, 1997.

_Syllabus_ *

Respondent sued under 42 U.S.C. §§1983 and 1985 and Arkansas law to recover
damages from petitioner, the current President of the United States, alleging,
_inter alia,_ that while he was Governor of Arkansas, petitioner made
"abhorrent'' sexual advances to her, and that her rejection of those advances
led to punishment by her supervisors in the state job she held at the time.
Petitioner promptly advised the Federal District Court that he would file a
motion to dismiss on Presidential immunity grounds, and requested that all
other pleadings and motions be deferred until the immunity issue was resolved.
After the court granted that request, petitioner filed a motion to dismiss
without prejudice and to toll any applicable statutes of limitation during his
Presidency. The District Judge denied dismissal on immunity grounds and ruled
that discovery could go forward, but ordered any trial stayed until
petitioner's Presidency ended. The Eighth Circuit affirmed the dismissal
denial, but reversed the trial postponement as the "functional equivalent'' of
a grant of temporary immunity to which petitioner was not constitutionally
entitled. The court explained that the President, like other officials, is
subject to the same laws that apply to all citizens, that no case had been
found in which an official was granted immunity from suit for his unofficial
acts, and that the rationale for official immunity is inapposite where only
personal, private conduct by a President is at issue. The court also rejected
the argument that, unless immunity is available, the threat of judicial
interference with the Executive Branch would violate separation of powers.

_Held:_

1.This Court need not address two important constitutional issues not
encompassed within the questions presented by the certiorari petition: (1)
whether a claim comparable to petitioner's assertion of immunity might succeed
in a state tribunal, and (2) whether a court may compel the President's
attendance at any specific time or place. Pp. ____-____.

2.Deferral of this litigation until petitioner's Presidency ends is not
constitutionally required. Pp. ____-____.

(a) Petitioner's principal submission-that in all but the most exceptional
cases, the Constitution affords the President temporary immunity from civil
damages litigation arising out of events that occurred before he took office-
cannot be sustained on the basis of precedent. The principal rationale for
affording Presidents immunity from damages actions based on their official
acts- _i.e.,_ to enable them to perform their designated functions effectively
without fear that a particular decision may give rise to personal liability,
see, _e.g., Nixon v. Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S. 731, 749, 752, and n. 32, 102 S.Ct.
2690, 2701, 2702, and n. 32, 73 L.Ed.2d 349-provides no support for an
immunity for _unofficial_ conduct. Moreover, immunities for acts clearly
_within_ official capacity are grounded in the nature of the function
performed, not the identity of the actor who performed it. _Forrester v.
White,_ 484 U.S. 219, 229, 108 S.Ct. 538, 545, 98 L.Ed.2d 555. The Court is
also unpersuaded by petitioner's historical evidence, which sheds little light
on the question at issue, and is largely canceled by conflicting evidence that
is itself consistent with both the doctrine of presidential immunity as set
forth in _Fitzgerald,_ and rejection of the immunity claim in this case. Pp.
____-____.

(b) The separation-of-powers doctrine does not require federal courts to stay
all private actions against the President until he leaves office. Even
accepting the unique importance of the Presidency in the constitutional
scheme, it does not follow that that doctrine would be violated by allowing
this action to proceed. The doctrine provides a self-executing safeguard
against the encroachment or aggrandizement of one of the three co-equal
branches of Government at the expense of another. _Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S.
1, 122, 96 S.Ct. 612, 683-684, 46 L.Ed.2d 659. But in this case there is no
suggestion that the Federal Judiciary is being asked to perform any function
that might in some way be described as "executive.'' Respondent is merely
asking the courts to exercise their core Article III jurisdiction to decide
cases and controversies, and, whatever the outcome, there is no possibility
that the decision here will curtail the scope of the Executive Branch's
official powers. The Court rejects petitioner's contention that this case-as
well as the potential additional litigation that an affirmance of the Eighth
Circuit's judgment might spawn-may place unacceptable burdens on the President
that will hamper the performance of his official duties. That assertion finds
little support either in history, as evidenced by the paucity of suits against
sitting Presidents for their private actions, or in the relatively narrow
compass of the issues raised in this particular case. Of greater significance,
it is settled that the Judiciary may severely burden the Executive Branch by
reviewing the legality of the President's official conduct, see _e.g.,
Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,_ 343 U.S. 579, 72 S.Ct. 863, 96 L.Ed.
1153, and may direct appropriate process to the President himself, see _e.g.,
United States v. Nixon,_ 418 U.S. 683, 94 S.Ct. 3090, 41 L.Ed.2d 1039. It must
follow that the federal courts have power to determine the legality of the
President's unofficial conduct. The reasons for rejecting a categorical rule
requiring federal courts to stay private actions during the President's term
apply as well to a rule that would, in petitioner's words, require a stay "in
all but the most exceptional cases.'' Pp. ____-____.

(c) Contrary to the Eighth Circuit's ruling, the District Court's stay order
was not the "functional equivalent'' of an unconstitutional grant of temporary
immunity. Rather, the District Court has broad discretion to stay proceedings
as an incident to its power to control its own docket. See, _e.g., Landis v.
North American Co.,_ 299 U.S. 248, 254, 57 S.Ct. 163, 165-166, 81 L.Ed. 153.
Moreover, the potential burdens on the President posed by this litigation are
appropriate matters for that court to evaluate in its management of the case,
and the high respect owed the Presidency is a matter that should inform the
conduct of the entire proceeding. Nevertheless, the District Court's stay
decision was an abuse of discretion because it took no account of the
importance of respondent's interest in bringing the case to trial, and because
it was premature in that there was nothing in the record to enable a judge to
assess whether postponement of trial after the completion of discovery would
be warranted. Pp. ____-____.

(d) The Court is not persuaded of the seriousness of the alleged risks that
this decision will generate a large volume of politically motivated harassing
and frivolous litigation and that national security concerns might prevent the
President from explaining a legitimate need for a continuance, and has
confidence in the ability of federal judges to deal with both concerns. If
Congress deems it appropriate to afford the President stronger protection, it
may respond with legislation. Pp. ____-____.

72 F.3d 1354, affirmed.

STEVENS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which REHNQUIST, C.J., and
O'CONNOR, SCALIA, KENNEDY, SOUTER, THOMAS, and GINSBURG, JJ., joined. BREYER,
J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment.

Robert S. Bennett, for petitioner.

Walter Dellinger, Durham, NC, for the United States, as amicus curiae by
special leave of the Court.

Gilbert K. Davis, Fairfax, VA, for respondent.

Justice STEVENS delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

This case raises a constitutional and a prudential question concerning the
Office of the President of the United States. Respondent, a private citizen,
seeks to recover damages from the current occupant of that office based on
actions allegedly taken before his term began. The President submits that in
all but the most exceptional cases the Constitution requires federal courts to
defer such litigation until his term ends and that, in any event, respect for
the office warrants such a stay. Despite the force of the arguments supporting
the President's submissions, we conclude that they must be rejected.

2

* Petitioner, William Jefferson Clinton, was elected to the Presidency in 1992, and re-elected in 1996. His term of office expires on January 20, 2001. In 1991 he was the Governor of the State of Arkansas. Respondent, Paula Corbin Jones, is a resident of California. In 1991 she lived in Arkansas, and was an employee of the Arkansas Industrial Development Commission.

3

On May 6, 1994, she commenced this action in the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of Arkansas by filing a complaint naming petitioner
and Danny Ferguson, a former Arkansas State Police officer, as defendants. The
complaint alleges two federal claims, and two state law claims over which the
federal court has jurisdiction because of the diverse citizenship of the
parties.1 As the case comes to us, we are required to assume the truth of the
detailed-but as yet untested- factual allegations in the complaint.

4

Those allegations principally describe events that are said to have occurred
on the afternoon of May 8, 1991, during an official conference held at the
Excelsior Hotel in Little Rock, Arkansas. The Governor delivered a speech at
the conference; respondent-working as a state employee-staffed the
registration desk. She alleges that Ferguson persuaded her to leave her desk
and to visit the Governor in a business suite at the hotel, where he made
"abhorrent''2 sexual advances that she vehemently rejected. She further claims
that her superiors at work subsequently dealt with her in a hostile and rude
manner, and changed her duties to punish her for rejecting those advances.
Finally, she alleges that after petitioner was elected President, Ferguson
defamed her by making a statement to a reporter that implied she had accepted
petitioner's alleged overtures, and that various persons authorized to speak
for the President publicly branded her a liar by denying that the incident had
occurred.

5

Respondent seeks actual damages of $75,000, and punitive damages of $100,000.
Her complaint contains four counts. The first charges that petitioner, acting
under color of state law, deprived her of rights protected by the
Constitution, in violation of Rev. Stat. §1979, 42 U.S.C. §1983\. The second
charges that petitioner and Ferguson engaged in a conspiracy to violate her
federal rights, also actionable under federal law. See Rev. Stat. §1980, 42
U.S.C. §1985\. The third is a state common law claim for intentional
infliction of emotional distress, grounded primarily on the incident at the
hotel. The fourth count, also based on state law, is for defamation, embracing
both the comments allegedly made to the press by Ferguson and the statements
of petitioner's agents. Inasmuch as the legal sufficiency of the claims has
not yet been challenged, we assume, without deciding, that each of the four
counts states a cause of action as a matter of law. With the exception of the
last charge, which arguably may involve conduct within the outer perimeter of
the President's official responsibilities, it is perfectly clear that the
alleged misconduct of petitioner was unrelated to any of his official duties
as President of the United States and, indeed, occurred before he was elected
to that office.3

II

6

In response to the complaint, petitioner promptly advised the District Court
that he intended to file a motion to dismiss on grounds of Presidential
immunity, and requested the court to defer all other pleadings and motions
until after the immunity issue was resolved.4 Relying on our cases holding
that immunity questions should be decided at the earliest possible stage of
the litigation, 858 F.Supp. 902, 905 (E.D.Ark.1994), our recognition of the
""singular importance of the President's duties,''' _id.,_ at 904 (quoting
_Nixon v. Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S. 731, 751, 102 S.Ct. 2690, 2702, 73 L.Ed.2d 349
(1982)), and the fact that the question did not require any analysis of the
allegations of the complaint, 858 F.Supp., at 905, the court granted the
request. Petitioner thereupon filed a motion "to dismiss . . . without
prejudice and to toll any statutes of limitation [that may be applicable]
until he is no longer President, at which time the plaintiff may refile the
instant suit.'' Record, Doc. No. 17. Extensive submissions were made to the
District Court by the parties and the Department of Justice.5

7

The District Judge denied the motion to dismiss on immunity grounds and ruled
that discovery in the case could go forward, but ordered any trial stayed
until the end of petitioner's Presidency. 869 F.Supp. 690 (E.D.Ark.1994).
Although she recognized that a "thin majority'' in _Nixon v. Fitzgerald,_ 457
U.S. 731, 102 S.Ct. 2690, 73 L.Ed.2d 349 (1982), had held that "the President
has absolute immunity from civil damage actions arising out of the execution
of official duties of office,'' she was not convinced that "a President has
absolute immunity from civil causes of action arising prior to assuming the
office.''6 She was, however, persuaded by some of the reasoning in our opinion
in _Fitzgerald_ that deferring the trial if one were required would be
appropriate.7 869 F.Supp., at 699-700. Relying in part on the fact that
respondent had failed to bring her complaint until two days before the 3-year
period of limitations expired, she concluded that the public interest in
avoiding litigation that might hamper the President in conducting the duties
of his office outweighed any demonstrated need for an immediate trial. _Id.,_
at 698-699.

8

Both parties appealed. A divided panel of the Court of Appeals affirmed the
denial of the motion to dismiss, but because it regarded the order postponing
the trial until the President leaves office as the "functional equivalent'' of
a grant of temporary immunity, it reversed that order. 72 F.3d 1354, 1361, n.
9, 1363 (C.A.8 1996). Writing for the majority, Judge Bowman explained that
"the President, like all other government officials, is subject to the same
laws that apply to all other members of our society,'' _id.,_ at 1358, that he
could find no "case in which any public official ever has been granted any
immunity from suit for his unofficial acts,'' _ibid.,_ and that the rationale
for official immunity "is inapposite where only personal, private conduct by a
President is at issue,'' _id.,_ at 1360. The majority specifically rejected
the argument that, unless immunity is available, the threat of judicial
interference with the Executive Branch through scheduling orders, potential
contempt citations, and sanctions would violate separation of powers
principles. Judge Bowman suggested that "judicial case management sensitive to
the burdens of the presidency and the demands of the President's schedule,''
would avoid the perceived danger. _Id.,_ at 1361.

9

In dissent, Judge Ross submitted that even though the holding in _Fitzgerald_
involved official acts, the logic of the opinion, which "placed primary
reliance on the prospect that the President's discharge of his constitutional
powers and duties would be impaired if he were subject to suits for damages,''
applies with equal force to this case. 72 F.3d, at 1367. In his view, "unless
exigent circumstances can be shown,'' all private actions for damages against
a sitting President must be stayed until the completion of his term. _Ibid._
In this case, Judge Ross saw no reason why the stay would prevent respondent
from ultimately obtaining an adjudication of her claims.

10

In response to the dissent, Judge Beam wrote a separate concurrence. He
suggested that a prolonged delay may well create a significant risk of
irreparable harm to respondent because of an unforeseeable loss of evidence or
the possible death of a party. _Id.,_ at 1363-1364. Moreover, he argued that
in civil rights cases brought under §1983 there is a "public interest in an
ordinary citizen's timely vindication of . . . her most fundamental rights
against alleged abuse of power by government officials.'' _Id.,_ at 1365. In
his view, the dissent's concern about judicial interference with the
functioning of the Presidency was "greatly overstated.'' _Ibid._ Neither the
involvement of prior presidents in litigation, either as parties or as
witnesses, nor the character of this "relatively uncomplicated civil
litigation,'' indicated that the threat was serious. _Id.,_ at 1365-1366.
Finally, he saw "no basis for staying discovery or trial of the claims against
Trooper Ferguson.'' _Id.,_ at 1366.8

III

11

The President, represented by private counsel, filed a petition for
certiorari. The Solicitor General, representing the United States, supported
the petition, arguing that the decision of the Court of Appeals was
"fundamentally mistaken'' and created "serious risks for the institution of
the Presidency.''9 In her brief in opposition to certiorari, respondent argued
that this "one-of-a-kind case is singularly inappropriate'' for the exercise
of our certiorari jurisdiction because it did not create any conflict among
the Courts of Appeals, it "does not pose any conceivable threat to the
functioning of the Executive Branch,'' and there is no precedent supporting
the President's position.10

12

While our decision to grant the petition expressed no judgment concerning the
merits of the case, it does reflect our appraisal of its importance. The
representations made on behalf of the Executive Branch as to the potential
impact of the precedent established by the Court of Appeals merit our
respectful and deliberate consideration.

13

It is true that we have often stressed the importance of avoiding the
premature adjudication of constitutional questions.11 That doctrine of
avoidance, however, is applicable to the entire Federal Judiciary, not just to
this Court, cf. _Arizonans for Official English v. Arizona,_ 520 U.S. ----,
117 S.Ct. 1055, 137 L.Ed.2d 170 (1997), and comes into play after the court
has acquired jurisdiction of a case. It does not dictate a discretionary
denial of every certiorari petition raising a novel constitutional question.
It does, however, make it appropriate to identify two important constitutional
issues not encompassed within the questions presented by the petition for
certiorari that we need not address today.12

14

First, because the claim of immunity is asserted in a federal court and relies
heavily on the doctrine of separation of powers that restrains each of the
three branches of the Federal Government from encroaching on the domain of the
other two, see, _e.g., Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 122, 96 S.Ct. 612,
683-684, 46 L.Ed.2d 659 (1976), it is not necessary to consider or decide
whether a comparable claim might succeed in a state tribunal. If this case
were being heard in a state forum, instead of advancing a separation of powers
argument, petitioner would presumably rely on federalism and comity
concerns,13 as well as the interest in protecting federal officials from
possible local prejudice that underlies the authority to remove certain cases
brought against federal officers from a state to a federal court, see 28
U.S.C. §1442(a); _Mesa v. California,_ 489 U.S. 121, 125-126, 109 S.Ct. 959,
962-963, 103 L.Ed.2d 99 (1989). Whether those concerns would present a more
compelling case for immunity is a question that is not before us.

15

Second, our decision rejecting the immunity claim and allowing the case to
proceed does not require us to confront the question whether a court may
compel the attendance of the President at any specific time or place. We
assume that the testimony of the President, both for discovery and for use at
trial, may be taken at the White House at a time that will accommodate his
busy schedule, and that, if a trial is held, there would be no necessity for
the President to attend in person, though he could elect to do so.14

IV

16

Petitioner's principal submission-that "in all but the most exceptional
cases,'' Brief for Petitioner i, the Constitution affords the President
temporary immunity from civil damages litigation arising out of events that
occurred before he took office-cannot be sustained on the basis of precedent.

17

Only three sitting Presidents have been defendants in civil litigation
involving their actions prior to taking office. Complaints against Theodore
Roosevelt and Harry Truman had been dismissed before they took office; the
dismissals were affirmed after their respective inaugurations.15 Two companion
cases arising out of an automobile accident were filed against John F. Kennedy
in 1960 during the Presidential campaign.16 After taking office, he
unsuccessfully argued that his status as Commander in Chief gave him a right
to a stay under the Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act of 1940, 50
U.S.C.App. §§501-525. The motion for a stay was denied by the District Court,
and the matter was settled out of court.17 Thus, none of those cases sheds any
light on the constitutional issue before us.

18

The principal rationale for affording certain public servants immunity from
suits for money damages arising out of their official acts is inapplicable to
unofficial conduct. In cases involving prosecutors, legislators, and judges we
have repeatedly explained that the immunity serves the public interest in
enabling such officials to perform their designated functions effectively
without fear that a particular decision may give rise to personal liability.18
We explained in _Ferri v. Ackerman,_ 444 U.S. 193, 100 S.Ct. 402, 62 L.Ed.2d
355 (1979):

19

"As public servants, the prosecutor and the judge represent the interest of
society as a whole. The conduct of their official duties may adversely affect
a wide variety of different individuals, each of whom may be a potential
source of future controversy. The societal interest in providing such public
officials with the maximum ability to deal fearlessly and impartially with the
public at large has long been recognized as an acceptable justification for
official immunity. The point of immunity for such officials is to forestall an
atmosphere of intimidation that would conflict with their resolve to perform
their designated functions in a principled fashion.'' _Id.,_ at 202-204, 100
S.Ct., at 408-409.

20

That rationale provided the principal basis for our holding that a former
President of the United States was "entitled to absolute immunity from damages
liability predicated on his official acts,'' _Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S., at 749,
102 S.Ct., at 2701. See _id.,_ at 752, 102 S.Ct., at 2702 (citing _Ferri v.
Ackerman_ ). Our central concern was to avoid rendering the President "unduly
cautious in the discharge of his official duties.'' 457 U.S., at 752, n. 32,
102 S.Ct., at 2702, n. 32.19

21

This reasoning provides no support for an immunity for _unofficial_ conduct.
As we explained in _Fitzgerald,_ "the sphere of protected action must be
related closely to the immunity's justifying purposes.'' _Id.,_ at 755, 102
S.Ct., at 2704. Because of the President's broad responsibilities, we
recognized in that case an immunity from damages claims arising out of
official acts extending to the "outer perimeter of his authority.'' _Id.,_ at
757, 102 S.Ct., at 2705. But we have never suggested that the President, or
any other official, has an immunity that extends beyond the scope of any
action taken in an official capacity. See _id.,_ at 759, 102 S.Ct., at 2706
(Burger, C. J., concurring) (noting that "a President, like Members of
Congress, judges, prosecutors, or congressional aides-all having absolute
immunity- are not immune for acts outside official duties''); see also _id.,_
at 761, n. 4, 102 S.Ct., at 2707, n. 4.

22

Moreover, when defining the scope of an immunity for acts clearly taken
_within_ an official capacity, we have applied a functional approach.
"Frequently our decisions have held that an official's absolute immunity
should extend only to acts in performance of particular functions of his
office.'' _Id.,_ at 755, 102 S.Ct., at 2704. Hence, for example, a judge's
absolute immunity does not extend to actions performed in a purely
administrative capacity. See _Forrester v. White,_ 484 U.S. 219, 229-230, 108
S.Ct. 538, 545-546, 98 L.Ed.2d 555 (1988). As our opinions have made clear,
immunities are grounded in "the nature of the function performed, not the
identity of the actor who performed it.'' _Id.,_ at 229, 108 S.Ct., at 545.

23

Petitioner's effort to construct an immunity from suit for unofficial acts
grounded purely in the identity of his office is unsupported by precedent.

V

24

We are also unpersuaded by the evidence from the historical record to which
petitioner has called our attention. He points to a comment by Thomas
Jefferson protesting the subpoena _duces tecum_ Chief Justice Marshall
directed to him in the Burr trial,20 a statement in the diaries kept by
Senator William Maclay of the first Senate debates, in which then Vice-
President John Adams and Senator Oliver Ellsworth are recorded as having said
that "the President personally [is] not . . . subject to any process
whatever,'' lest it be "put . . . in the power of a common Justice to exercise
any Authority over him and Stop the Whole Machine of Government,''21 and to a
quotation from Justice Story's Commentaries on the Constitution.22 None of
these sources sheds much light on the question at hand.23

25

Respondent, in turn, has called our attention to conflicting historical
evidence. Speaking in favor of the Constitution's adoption at the Pennsylvania
Convention, James Wilson-who had participated in the Philadelphia Convention
at which the document was drafted-explained that, although the President "is
placed [on] high,'' "not a single privilege is annexed to his character; far
from being above the laws, he is amenable to them in his private character as
a citizen, and in his public character by impeachment.'' 2 J. Elliot, Debates
on the Federal Constitution 480 (2d ed. 1863) (emphasis omitted). This
description is consistent with both the doctrine of presidential immunity as
set forth in _Fitzgerald,_ and rejection of the immunity claim in this case.
With respect to acts taken in his "public character''-that is official acts-
the President may be disciplined principally by impeachment, not by private
lawsuits for damages. But he is otherwise subject to the laws for his purely
private acts.

26

In the end, as applied to the particular question before us, we reach the same
conclusion about these historical materials that Justice Jackson described
when confronted with an issue concerning the dimensions of the President's
power. "Just what our forefathers did envision, or would have envisioned had
they foreseen modern conditions, must be divined from materials almost as
enigmatic as the dreams Joseph was called upon to interpret for Pharoah. A
century and a half of partisan debate and scholarly speculation yields no net
result but only supplies more or less apt quotations from respected sources on
each side . . . . They largely cancel each other.'' _Youngstown Sheet & Tube
Co. v. Sawyer,_ 343 U.S. 579, 634-635, 72 S.Ct. 863, 869-870, 96 L.Ed. 1153
(1952) (concurring opinion).

VI

27

Petitioner's strongest argument supporting his immunity claim is based on the
text and structure of the Constitution. He does not contend that the occupant
of the Office of the President is "above the law,'' in the sense that his
conduct is entirely immune from judicial scrutiny.24 The President argues
merely for a postponement of the judicial proceedings that will determine
whether he violated any law. His argument is grounded in the character of the
office that was created by Article II of the Constitution, and relies on
separation of powers principles that have structured our constitutional
arrangement since the founding.

28

As a starting premise, petitioner contends that he occupies a unique office
with powers and responsibilities so vast and important that the public
interest demands that he devote his undivided time and attention to his public
duties. He submits that-given the nature of the office-the doctrine of
separation of powers places limits on the authority of the Federal Judiciary
to interfere with the Executive Branch that would be transgressed by allowing
this action to proceed.

29

We have no dispute with the initial premise of the argument. Former
presidents, from George Washington to George Bush, have consistently endorsed
petitioner's characterization of the office.25 After serving his term, Lyndon
Johnson observed: "Of all the 1,886 nights I was President, there were not
many when I got to sleep before 1 or 2 a. m., and there were few mornings when
I didn't wake up by 6 or 6:30.''26 In 1967, the Twenty-fifth Amendment to the
Constitution was adopted to ensure continuity in the performance of the powers
and duties of the office;27 one of the sponsors of that Amendment stressed the
importance of providing that "at all times'' there be a President "who has
complete control and will be able to perform'' those duties.28 As Justice
Jackson has pointed out, the Presidency concentrates executive authority "in a
single head in whose choice the whole Nation has a part, making him the focus
of public hopes and expectations. In drama, magnitude and finality his
decisions so far overshadow any others that almost alone he fills the public
eye and ear.'' _Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,_ 343 U.S., at 653, 72
S.Ct., at 879 (Jackson, J., concurring). We have, in short, long recognized
the "unique position in the constitutional scheme'' that this office occupies.
_Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S., at 749, 102 S.Ct., at 2701.29 Thus, while we suspect
that even in our modern era there remains some truth to Chief Justice
Marshall's suggestion that the duties of the Presidency are not entirely
"unremitting,'' _United States v. Burr,_ 25 F. Cas. 30, 34 (C.C.Va.1807), we
accept the initial premise of the Executive's argument.

30

It does not follow, however, that separation of powers principles would be
violated by allowing this action to proceed. The doctrine of separation of
powers is concerned with the allocation of official power among the three co-
equal branches of our Government. The Framers "built into the tripartite
Federal Government . . . a self-executing safeguard against the encroachment
or aggrandizement of one branch at the expense of the other.'' _Buckley v.
Valeo,_ 424 U.S., at 122, 96 S.Ct., at 684.30 Thus, for example, the Congress
may not exercise the judicial power to revise final judgments, _Plaut v.
Spendthrift Farm, Inc.,_ 514 U.S. 211, 115 S.Ct. 1447, 131 L.Ed.2d 328
(1995),31 or the executive power to manage an airport, see _Metropolitan
Washington Airports Authority v. Citizens for Abatement of Aircraft Noise,
Inc.,_ 501 U.S. 252, 276, 111 S.Ct. 2298, 2312, 115 L.Ed.2d 236 (1991)
(holding that " [i]f the power is executive, the Constitution does not permit
an agent of Congress to exercise it'').32 See _J.W. Hampton, Jr., & Co. v.
United States,_ 276 U.S. 394, 406, 48 S.Ct. 348, 351, 72 L.Ed. 624 (1928)
(Congress may not "invest itself or its members with either executive power or
judicial power''). Similarly, the President may not exercise the legislative
power to authorize the seizure of private property for public use.
_Youngstown,_ 343 U.S., at 588, 72 S.Ct., at 867. And, the judicial power to
decide cases and controversies does not include the provision of purely
advisory opinions to the Executive,33 or permit the federal courts to resolve
non justiciable questions.34

31

Of course the lines between the powers of the three branches are not always
neatly defined. See _Mistretta v. United States,_ 488 U.S. 361, 380-381, 109
S.Ct. 647, 659-660, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 (1989).35 But in this case there is no
suggestion that the Federal Judiciary is being asked to perform any function
that might in some way be described as "executive.'' Respondent is merely
asking the courts to exercise their core Article III jurisdiction to decide
cases and controversies. Whatever the outcome of this case, there is no
possibility that the decision will curtail the scope of the official powers of
the Executive Branch. The litigation of questions that relate entirely to the
unofficial conduct of the individual who happens to be the President poses no
perceptible risk of misallocation of either judicial power or executive power.

32

Rather than arguing that the decision of the case will produce either an
aggrandizement of judicial power or a narrowing of executive power, petitioner
contends that-as a by-product of an otherwise traditional exercise of judicial
power-burdens will be placed on the President that will hamper the performance
of his official duties. We have recognized that " [e]ven when a branch does
not arrogate power to itself . . . the separation-of-powers doctrine requires
that a branch not impair another in the performance of its constitutional
duties.'' _Loving v. United States,_ 517 U.S. ----, ----, 116 S.Ct. 1737,
1743, 135 L.Ed.2d 36 (1996); see also _Nixon v. Administrator of General
Services,_ 433 U.S. 425, 443, 97 S.Ct. 2777, 2790, 53 L.Ed.2d 867 (1977). As a
factual matter, petitioner contends that this particular case-as well as the
potential additional litigation that an affirmance of the Court of Appeals
judgment might spawn-may impose an unacceptable burden on the President's time
and energy, and thereby impair the effective performance of his office.

33

Petitioner's predictive judgment finds little support in either history or the
relatively narrow compass of the issues raised in this particular case. As we
have already noted, in the more than 200-year history of the Republic, only
three sitting Presidents have been subjected to suits for their private
actions.36 See _supra,_ at __. If the past is any indicator, it seems unlikely
that a deluge of such litigation will ever engulf the Presidency. As for the
case at hand, if properly managed by the District Court, it appears to us
highly unlikely to occupy any substantial amount of petitioner's time.

34

Of greater significance, petitioner errs by presuming that interactions
between the Judicial Branch and the Executive, even quite burdensome
interactions, necessarily rise to the level of constitutionally forbidden
impairment of the Executive's ability to perform its constitutionally mandated
functions. " [O]ur . . . system imposes upon the Branches a degree of
overlapping responsibility, a duty of interdependence as well as independence
the absence of which "would preclude the establishment of a Nation capable of
governing itself effectively.''' _Mistretta,_ 488 U.S., at 381, 109 S.Ct., at
659 (quoting _Buckley,_ 424 U.S., at 121, 96 S.Ct., at 683). As Madison
explained, separation of powers does not mean that the branches "ought to have
no _partial agency_ in, or no _controul_ over the acts of each other.''37 The
fact that a federal court's exercise of its traditional Article III
jurisdiction may significantly burden the time and attention of the Chief
Executive is not sufficient to establish a violation of the Constitution. Two
long-settled propositions, first announced by Chief Justice Marshall, support
that conclusion.

35

First, we have long held that when the President takes official action, the
Court has the authority to determine whether he has acted within the law.
Perhaps the most dramatic example of such a case is our holding that President
Truman exceeded his constitutional authority when he issued an order directing
the Secretary of Commerce to take possession of and operate most of the
Nation's steel mills in order to avert a national catastrophe. _Youngstown
Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,_ 343 U.S. 579, 72 S.Ct. 863, 96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952).
Despite the serious impact of that decision on the ability of the Executive
Branch to accomplish its assigned mission, and the substantial time that the
President must necessarily have devoted to the matter as a result of judicial
involvement, we exercised our Article III jurisdiction to decide whether his
official conduct conformed to the law. Our holding was an application of the
principle established in _Marbury v. Madison,_ 1 Cranch 137, 2 L.Ed. 60
(1803), that " [i]t is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial
department to say what the law is.'' _Id.,_ at 177.

36

Second, it is also settled that the President is subject to judicial process
in appropriate circumstances. Although Thomas Jefferson apparently thought
otherwise, Chief Justice Marshall, when presiding in the treason trial of
Aaron Burr, ruled that a subpoena _duces tecum_ could be directed to the
President. _United States v. Burr,_ 25 F. Cas. 30 (No. 14,692d) (C.C.Va.
1807).38 We unequivocally and emphatically endorsed Marshall's position when
we held that President Nixon was obligated to comply with a subpoena
commanding him to produce certain tape recordings of his conversations with
his aides. _United States v. Nixon,_ 418 U.S. 683, 94 S.Ct. 3090, 41 L.Ed.2d
1039 (1974). As we explained, "neither the doctrine of separation of powers,
nor the need for confidentiality of high-level communications, without more,
can sustain an absolute, unqualified Presidential privilege of immunity from
judicial process under all circumstances.'' _Id.,_ at 706, 94 S.Ct., at
3106.39

37

Sitting Presidents have responded to court orders to provide testimony and
other information with sufficient frequency that such interactions between the
Judicial and Executive Branches can scarcely be thought a novelty. President
Monroe responded to written interrogatories, see Rotunda, Presidents and Ex-
Presidents as Witnesses: A Brief Historical Footnote, 1975 U. Ill. L.F. 1,
5-6, President Nixon-as noted above-produced tapes in response to a subpoena
_duces tecum,_ see _United States v. Nixon,_ President Ford complied with an
order to give a deposition in a criminal trial, _United States v. Fromme,_ 405
F.Supp. 578 (E.D.Cal.1975), and President Clinton has twice given videotaped
testimony in criminal proceedings, see _United States v. McDougal,_ 934
F.Supp. 296 (E.D.Ark.1996); _United States v. Branscum,_ No., LRP-CR-96-49
(E.D. Ark., June 7, 1996). Moreover, sitting Presidents have also voluntarily
complied with judicial requests for testimony. President Grant gave a lengthy
deposition in a criminal case under such circumstances, R. Rotunda & J. Nowak,
Treatise on Constitutional Law §7.1 (2d ed.1992), and President Carter
similarly gave videotaped testimony for use at a criminal trial, _ibid._

38

In sum, " [i]t is settled law that the separation-of-powers doctrine does not
bar every exercise of jurisdiction over the President of the United States.''
_Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S., at 753-754, 102 S.Ct., at 2703. If the Judiciary may
severely burden the Executive Branch by reviewing the legality of the
President's official conduct, and if it may direct appropriate process to the
President himself, it must follow that the federal courts have power to
determine the legality of his unofficial conduct. The burden on the
President's time and energy that is a mere by-product of such review surely
cannot be considered as onerous as the direct burden imposed by judicial
review and the occasional invalidation of his official actions.40 We therefore
hold that the doctrine of separation of powers does not require federal courts
to stay all private actions against the President until he leaves office.

39

The reasons for rejecting such a categorical rule apply as well to a rule that
would require a stay "in all but the most exceptional cases.'' Brief for
Petitioner i. Indeed, if the Framers of the Constitution had thought it
necessary to protect the President from the burdens of private litigation, we
think it far more likely that they would have adopted a categorical rule than
a rule that required the President to litigate the question whether a specific
case belonged in the "exceptional case'' subcategory. In all events, the
question whether a specific case should receive exceptional treatment is more
appropriately the subject of the exercise of judicial discretion than an
interpretation of the Constitution. Accordingly, we turn to the question
whether the District Court's decision to stay the trial until after petitioner
leaves office was an abuse of discretion.

VII

40

The Court of Appeals described the District Court's discretionary decision to
stay the trial as the "functional equivalent'' of a grant of temporary
immunity. 72 F.3d, at 1361, n. 9. Concluding that petitioner was not
constitutionally entitled to such an immunity, the court held that it was
error to grant the stay. _Ibid._ Although we ultimately conclude that the stay
should not have been granted, we think the issue is more difficult than the
opinion of the Court of Appeals suggests.

41

Strictly speaking the stay was not the functional equivalent of the
constitutional immunity that petitioner claimed, because the District Court
ordered discovery to proceed. Moreover, a stay of either the trial or
discovery might be justified by considerations that do not require the
recognition of any constitutional immunity. The District Court has broad
discretion to stay proceedings as an incident to its power to control its own
docket. See, _e.g., Landis v. North American Co.,_ 299 U.S. 248, 254, 57 S.Ct.
163, 165-166, 81 L.Ed. 153 (1936). As we have explained, " [e]specially in
cases of extraordinary public moment, [a plaintiff] may be required to submit
to delay not immoderate in extent and not oppressive in its consequences if
the public welfare or convenience will thereby be promoted.'' _Id.,_ at 256,
57 S.Ct., at 166. Although we have rejected the argument that the potential
burdens on the President violate separation of powers principles, those
burdens are appropriate matters for the District Court to evaluate in its
management of the case. The high respect that is owed to the office of the
Chief Executive, though not justifying a rule of categorical immunity, is a
matter that should inform the conduct of the entire proceeding, including the
timing and scope of discovery.41

42

Nevertheless, we are persuaded that it was an abuse of discretion for the
District Court to defer the trial until after the President leaves office.
Such a lengthy and categorical stay takes no account whatever of the
respondent's interest in bringing the case to trial. The complaint was filed
within the statutory limitations period-albeit near the end of that period-and
delaying trial would increase the danger of prejudice resulting from the loss
of evidence, including the inability of witnesses to recall specific facts, or
the possible death of a party.

43

The decision to postpone the trial was, furthermore, premature. The proponent
of a stay bears the burden of establishing its need. _Id.,_ at 255, 57 S.Ct.,
at 166. In this case, at the stage at which the District Court made its
ruling, there was no way to assess whether a stay of trial after the
completion of discovery would be warranted. Other than the fact that a trial
may consume some of the President's time and attention, there is nothing in
the record to enable a judge to assess the potential harm that may ensue from
scheduling the trial promptly after discovery is concluded. We think the
District Court may have given undue weight to the concern that a trial might
generate unrelated civil actions that could conceivably hamper the President
in conducting the duties of his office. If and when that should occur, the
court's discretion would permit it to manage those actions in such fashion
(including deferral of trial) that interference with the President's duties
would not occur. But no such impingement upon the President's conduct of his
office was shown here.

VIII

44

We add a final comment on two matters that are discussed at length in the
briefs: the risk that our decision will generate a large volume of politically
motivated harassing and frivolous litigation, and the danger that national
security concerns might prevent the President from explaining a legitimate
need for a continuance.

45

We are not persuaded that either of these risks is serious. Most frivolous and
vexatious litigation is terminated at the pleading stage or on summary
judgment, with little if any personal involvement by the defendant. See Fed.
Rules Civ. Proc. 12, 56. Moreover, the availability of sanctions provides a
significant deterrent to litigation directed at the President in his
unofficial capacity for purposes of political gain or harassment.42 History
indicates that the likelihood that a significant number of such cases will be
filed is remote. Although scheduling problems may arise, there is no reason to
assume that the District Courts will be either unable to accommodate the
President's needs or unfaithful to the tradition- especially in matters
involving national security-of giving "the utmost deference to Presidential
responsibilities.''43 Several Presidents, including petitioner, have given
testimony without jeopardizing the Nation's security. See _supra,_ at __. In
short, we have confidence in the ability of our federal judges to deal with
both of these concerns.

46

If Congress deems it appropriate to afford the President stronger protection,
it may respond with appropriate legislation. As petitioner notes in his brief,
Congress has enacted more than one statute providing for the deferral of civil
litigation to accommodate important public interests. Brief for Petitioner
34-36. See, _e.g.,_ 11 U.S.C. §362 (litigation against debtor stayed upon
filing of bankruptcy petition); Soldiers' and Sailors' Civil Relief Act of
1940, 50 U.S.C.App. §§501-525 (provisions governing, _inter alia,_ tolling or
stay of civil claims by or against military personnel during course of active
duty). If the Constitution embodied the rule that the President advocates,
Congress, of course, could not repeal it. But our holding today raises no
barrier to a statutory response to these concerns.

47

The Federal District Court has jurisdiction to decide this case. Like every
other citizen who properly invokes that jurisdiction, respondent has a right
to an orderly disposition of her claims. Accordingly, the judgment of the
Court of Appeals is affirmed.

48

_It is so ordered._

49

Justice BREYER, concurring in the judgment.

50

I agree with the majority that the Constitution does not automatically grant
the President an immunity from civil lawsuits based upon his private conduct.
Nor does the "doctrine of separation of powers . . . require federal courts to
stay'' virtually "all private actions against the President until he leaves
office.'' _Ante,_ at __. Rather, as the Court of Appeals stated, the President
cannot simply rest upon the claim that a private civil lawsuit for damages
will "interfere with the constitutionally assigned duties of the Executive
Branch . . . without detailing any specific responsibilities or explaining how
or the degree to which they are affected by the suit.'' 72 F.3d 1354, 1361
(C.A.8 1996). To obtain a postponement the President must "bea[r] the burden
of establishing its need.'' _Ante,_ at __.

51

In my view, however, once the President sets forth and explains a conflict
between judicial proceeding and public duties, the matter changes. At that
point, the Constitution permits a judge to schedule a trial in an ordinary
civil damages action (where postponement normally is possible without
overwhelming damage to a plaintiff) only within the constraints of a
constitutional principle-a principle that forbids a federal judge in such a
case to interfere with the President's discharge of his public duties. I have
no doubt that the Constitution contains such a principle applicable to civil
suits, based upon Article II's vesting of the entire "executive Power'' in a
single individual, implemented through the Constitution's structural
separation of powers, and revealed both by history and case precedent.

52

I recognize that this case does not require us now to apply the principle
specifically, thereby delineating its contours; nor need we now decide whether
lower courts are to apply it directly or categorically through the use of
presumptions or rules of administration. Yet I fear that to disregard it now
may appear to deny it. I also fear that the majority's description of the
relevant precedents de-emphasizes the extent to which they support a principle
of the President's independent authority to control his own time and energy,
see, _e.g., ante,_ at __ (describing the "central concern'' of _Nixon v.
Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S. 731, 102 S.Ct. 2690, 73 L.Ed.2d 349 (1982), as "to avoid
rendering the President "unduly cautious'''); _ante,_ at __, and n. 23
(describing statements by Story, Jefferson, Adams, and Ellsworth as providing
"little'' or "no substantial support'' for the President's position). Further,
if the majority is wrong in predicting the future infrequency of private civil
litigation against sitting Presidents, _ante,_ at __, acknowledgement and
future delineation of the constitutional principle will prove a practically
necessary institutional safeguard. For these reasons, I think it important to
explain how the Constitution's text, history, and precedent support this
principle of judicial noninterference with Presidential functions in ordinary
civil damages actions.

53

* The Constitution states that the "executive Power shall be vested in a President.'' U.S. Const., Art. II, §1\. This constitutional delegation means that a sitting President is unusually busy, that his activities have an unusually important impact upon the lives of others, and that his conduct embodies an authority bestowed by the entire American electorate. He (along with his constitutionally subordinate Vice President) is the only official for whom the entire Nation votes, and is the only elected officer to represent the entire Nation both domestically and abroad.

54

This constitutional delegation means still more. Article II makes a single
President responsible for the actions of the Executive Branch in much the same
way that the entire Congress is responsible for the actions of the Legislative
Branch, or the entire Judiciary for those of the Judicial Branch. It thereby
creates a constitutional equivalence between a single President, on the one
hand, and many legislators, or judges, on the other.

55

The Founders created this equivalence by consciously deciding to vest
Executive authority in one person rather than several. They did so in order to
focus, rather than to spread, Executive responsibility thereby facilitating
accountability. They also sought to encourage energetic, vigorous, decisive,
and speedy execution of the laws by placing in the hands of a single,
constitutionally indispensable, individual the ultimate authority that, in
respect to the other branches, the Constitution divides among many. Compare
U.S. Const., Art. II, §1 (vesting power in "a President'') with U.S. Const.,
Art. I, §1 (vesting power in "a Congress'' that "consist[s] of a Senate and
House of Representatives'') and U.S. Const., Art. III, §1 (vesting power in a
"supreme Court'' and "inferior Courts'').

56

The authority explaining the nature and importance of this decision is legion.
See, _e.g.,_ J. Locke, Second Treatise of Civil Government §144 (J. Gough
ed.1947) (desirability of a perpetual Executive); W. Blackstone, Commentaries
*242-243 (need for single Executive); The Federalist No. 70, p. 423 (C.
Rossiter ed. 1961) (A.Hamilton) (Executive " [e]nergy'' needed for security,
"steady administration of the laws,'' "protection of property,'' "justice,''
and protection of "liberty''); Oliver Ellworth, The Landholder, VI, in Essays
on the Constitution 163 (P. Ford ed. 1892) ("supreme executive should be one
person, and unfettered otherwise than by the laws he is to execute'');
_Morrison v. Olson,_ 487 U.S. 654, 698-699, 108 S.Ct. 2597, 2623, 101 L.Ed.2d
569 (1988) (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (describing history); _id.,_ at 705, 108
S.Ct., at 2626-2627 (describing textual basis); _id.,_ at 729, 108 S.Ct., at
2638-2639 (describing policy arguments). See also The Federalist No. 71, at
431 (A.Hamilton); P. Kurland, Watergate and the Constitution 135 (1978)
(President is "sole indispensable man in government'' and "should not be
called'' from his duties "at the instance of any other . . . branch of
government''); Calabresi, Some Normative Arguments for the Unitary Executive,
48 Ark. L.Rev. 23, 37-47 (1995). Cf. T. Roosevelt, An Autobiography 372
(1913).

57

For present purposes, this constitutional structure means that the President
is not like Congress, for Congress can function as if it were whole, even when
up to half of its members are absent, see U.S. Const., Art. I, §5, cl. 1. It
means that the President is not like the Judiciary, for judges often can
designate other judges, _e.g.,_ from other judicial circuits, to sit even
should an entire court be detained by personal litigation. It means that,
unlike Congress, which is regularly out of session, U.S. Const., Art. I, §§4,
5, 7, the President never adjourns.

58

More importantly, these constitutional objectives explain why a President,
though able to delegate duties to others, cannot delegate ultimate
responsibility or the active obligation to supervise that goes with it. And
the related constitutional equivalence between President, Congress, and the
Judiciary, means that judicial scheduling orders in a private civil case must
not only take reasonable account of, say, a particularly busy schedule, or a
job on which others critically depend, or an underlying electoral mandate.
They must also reflect the fact that interference with a President's ability
to carry out his public responsibilities is constitutionally equivalent to
interference with the ability of the entirety of Congress, or the Judicial
Branch, to carry out their public obligations.

II

59

The leading case regarding Presidential immunity from suit is _Nixon v.
Fitzgerald._ Before discussing _Fitzgerald,_ it is helpful to understand the
historical precedent on which it relies. While later events have called into
question some of the more extreme views on Presidential immunity, the essence
of the Constitutional principle remains true today. The historical sources,
while not in themselves fully determinative, in conjunction with this Court's
precedent inform my judgment that the Constitution protects the President from
judicial orders in private civil cases to the extent that those orders could
significantly interfere with his efforts to carry out his ongoing public
responsibilities.

60

* Three of the historical sources this Court cited in _Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S., at 749, 750-752, n. 31, 102 S.Ct., at 2701, 2701-2703, n. 32-a commentary by Joseph Story, an argument attributed to John Adams and Oliver Ellsworth, and a letter written by Thomas Jefferson-each make clear that this is so.

61

_First,_ Joseph Story wrote in his Commentaries:

62

"There are . . . incidental powers, belonging to the executive department,
which are necessarily implied from the nature of the functions, which are
confided to it. Among those, must necessarily be included the power to perform
them, without any obstruction or impediment whatsoever. The president cannot,
therefore, be liable to arrest, imprisonment, or detention, while he is in the
discharge of the duties of his office; _and for this purpose his person must
be deemed, in civil cases at least, to possess an official inviolability.''_ 3
J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States §1563, pp.
418-419 (1833) (emphasis added), quoted in _Fitzgerald, supra,_ at 749, 102
S.Ct., at 2701.

63

As interpreted by this Court in _Nixon v. Fitzgerald,_ the words "for this
purpose'' would seem to refer to the President's need for "official
inviolability'' in order to "perform'' the duties of his office without
"obstruction or impediment.'' As so read, Story's commentary does not
explicitly define the contours of "official inviolability.'' But it does
suggest that the "inviolability'' is time bound ("while . . . in the discharge
of the duties of his office''); that it applies in private lawsuits (for it
attaches to the President's "person'' in "civil cases''); and that it is
functional ("necessarily implied from the nature of the [President's]
functions'').

64

Since _Nixon_ did not involve a physical constraint, the Court's reliance upon
Justice Story's commentary makes clear, in the Court's view, that the
commentary does not limit the scope of "inviolability'' to an immunity from a
physical imprisonment, physical detention, or physical "arrest''-a now
abandoned procedure that permitted the arrest of certain civil case defendants
( _e.g.,_ those threatened by bankruptcy) during a civil proceeding.

65

I would therefore read Story's commentary to mean what it says, namely that
Article II implicitly grants an "official inviolability'' to the President
"while he is in the discharge of the duties of his office,'' and that this
inviolability must be broad enough to permit him "to perform'' his official
duties without "obstruction or impediment.'' As this Court has previously
held, the Constitution may grant this kind of protection implicitly; it need
not do so explicitly. See _Fitzgerald, supra,_ at 750, n. 31, 102 S.Ct., at
2701, n. 31; _United States v. Nixon,_ 418 U.S. 683, 705-706, n. 16, 94 S.Ct.
3090, 3106, n. 16, 41 L.Ed.2d 1039 (1974); cf. _McCulloch v. Maryland,_ 4
Wheat. 316, 406, 4 L.Ed. 579 (1819).

66

_Second,_ during the first Congress, then-Vice President John Adams and then-
Senator Oliver Ellsworth expressed a view of an applicable immunity far
broader than any currently asserted. Speaking of a sitting President, they
said that the ""President, personally, was not the subject to any process
whatever . . . . For [that] would . . . put it in the power of a common
justice to exercise any authority over him and stop the whole machine of
Government.''' 457 U.S., at 751, n. 31, 102 S.Ct., at 2702, n. 31 (quoting
Journal of William Maclay 167 (E. Maclay ed. 1890) (Sept. 26 journal entry
reporting exchange between Senator Maclay, Adams, and Ellsworth)). They
included in their claim a kind of immunity from criminal, as well as civil,
process. They responded to a counterargument-that the President "was not above
the laws,'' and would have to be arrested if guilty of crimes-by stating that
the President would first have to be impeached, and could then be prosecuted.
9 Documentary History of First Federal Congress of United States 168 (K.
Bowling & H. Veit eds. 1988) (Diary of William Maclay). This court's rejection
of Adams' and Ellsworth's views in the context of criminal proceedings, see
_ante,_ at __, does not deprive those views of authority here. See
_Fitzgerald, supra,_ at 751-752, n. 31, 102 S.Ct., at 2702, n. 31. Nor does
the fact that Senator William Maclay, who reported the views of Adams and
Ellsworth, "went on to point out in his diary that he virulently disagreed
with them.'' _Ante,_ at __, n. 23. Maclay, unlike Adams and Ellsworth, was not
an important political figure at the time of the constitutional debates. See
Diary of William Maclay xi-xiii.

67

_Third,_ in 1807, a sitting President, Thomas Jefferson, during a dispute
about whether the federal courts could subpoena his presence in a criminal
case, wrote the following to United States Attorney George Hay:

68

"The leading principle of our Constitution is the independence of the
Legislature, executive and judiciary of each other, and none are more jealous
of this than the judiciary. But would the executive be independent of the
judiciary, if he were subject to the _commands_ of the latter, & to
imprisonment for disobedience; if the several courts could bandy him from
pillar to post, keep him constantly trudging from north to south & east to
west, and withdraw him entirely from his constitutional duties?'' 10 Works of
Thomas Jefferson 404, n. (P. Ford ed.1905) (letter of June 20, 1807, from
President Thomas Jefferson to United States Attorney George Hay), quoted in
_Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S., at 751, n. 31, 102 S.Ct., at 2702, n. 31.

69

Three days earlier Jefferson had written to the same correspondent:

70

"To comply with such calls would leave the nation without an executive branch,
whose agency, nevertheless, is understood to be so constantly necessary, that
it is the sole branch which the constitution requires to be always in
function. It could not then mean that it should be withdrawn from its station
by any co-ordinate authority.'' 10 Works of Thomas Jefferson, at 401 (letter
of June 17, 1807, from Thomas Jefferson to George Hay).

71

Jefferson, like Adams and Ellsworth, argued strongly for an immunity from both
criminal and civil judicial process-an immunity greater in scope than any
immunity, or any special scheduling factor, now at issue in the civil case
before us. The significance of his views for present purposes lies in his
conviction that the Constitution protected a sitting President from litigation
that would "withdraw'' a President from his current "constitutional duties.''
That concern may not have applied to Mr. Fitzgerald's 1982 case against a
_former_ President, but it is at issue in the current litigation.

72

Precedent that suggests to the contrary-that the Constitution does _not_ offer
a sitting President significant protections from potentially distracting civil
litigation-consists of the following: (1) In several instances sitting
Presidents have given depositions or testified at criminal trials, and (2)
this Court has twice authorized the enforcement of subpoenas seeking documents
from a sitting President for use in a criminal case.

73

I agree with the majority that these precedents reject any absolute
Presidential immunity from all court process. But they do not cast doubt upon
Justice Story's basic conclusion that "in civil cases,'' a sitting President
"possess[es] an official inviolability'' as necessary to permit him to
"perform'' the duties of his office without "obstruction or impediment.''

74

The first set of precedents tells us little about what the Constitution
commands, for they amount to voluntary actions on the part of a sitting
President. The second set of precedents amounts to a search for documents,
rather than a direct call upon Presidential time. More important, both sets of
precedents involve _criminal_ proceedings in which the President participated
as a witness. Criminal proceedings, unlike private civil proceedings, are
public acts initiated and controlled by the Executive Branch; see _United
States v. Nixon,_ 418 U.S., at 693-696, 94 S.Ct., at 3100-3102; they are not
normally subject to postponement, see U.S. Const., Amdt. 6; and ordinarily
they put at risk, not a private citizen's hope for monetary compensation, but
a private citizen's freedom from enforced confinement, 418 U.S., at 711-712,
and n. 19, 94 S.Ct., at 3109-3110, and n. 19; _Fitzgerald, supra,_ at 754, n.
37, 102 S.Ct., at 2703, n. 37. See also _id.,_ at 758, n. 41, 102 S.Ct., at
2705, n. 41. Nor is it normally possible in a criminal case, unlike many civil
cases, to provide the plaintiff with interest to compensate for scheduling
delay. See, _e.g., Winter v. Cerro Gordo County Conservation Bd.,_ 925 F.2d
1069, 1073 (C.A.8 1991); _Foley v. Lowell,_ 948 F.2d 10, 17-18 (C.A.1 1991);
_Wooten v. McClendon,_ 272 Ark. 61, 62-63, 612 S.W.2d 105, 106 (1981).

75

The remaining precedent to which the majority refers does not seem relevant in
this case. That precedent, _Youngstown Sheet_ & _Tube Co. v. Sawyer,_ 343 U.S.
579, 585, 72 S.Ct. 863, 865-866, 96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952), concerns _official_
action. And any Presidential time spent dealing with, or action taken in
response to, that kind of case _is_ part of a President's official duties.
Hence court review in such circumstances could not interfere with, or distract
from, official duties. Insofar as a court orders a President, in any such a
proceeding, to act or to refrain from action, it defines, or determines, or
clarifies, the legal scope of an official duty. By definition (if the order
itself is lawful), it cannot impede, or obstruct, or interfere with, the
President's basic task-the lawful exercise of his Executive authority. Indeed,
if constitutional principles counsel caution when judges consider an order
that directly requires the President properly to carry out his official
duties, see _Franklin v. Massachusetts,_ 505 U.S. 788, 827, 112 S.Ct. 2767,
2789, 120 L.Ed.2d 636 (1992) (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment) (describing the "apparently unbroken historical tradition . . .
implicit in the separation of powers'' that a President may not be ordered by
the Judiciary to perform particular Executive acts); _id.,_ at 802-803, 112
S.Ct., at 2776-2777 (plurality opinion of O'CONNOR, J.), so much the more must
those principles counsel caution when such an order threatens to _interfere_
with the President's properly carrying out those duties.

B

76

Case law, particularly, _Nixon v. Fitzgerald,_ strongly supports the principle
that judges hearing a private civil damages action against a sitting President
may not issue orders that could significantly distract a President from his
official duties. In _Fitzgerald,_ the Court held that former President Nixon
was absolutely immune from civil damage lawsuits based upon any conduct within
the "outer perimeter'' of his official responsibilities. 457 U.S., at 756, 102
S.Ct., at 2704. The holding rested upon six determinations that are relevant
here.

77

First, the Court found that the Constitution assigns the President
_singularly_ important duties (thus warranting an "absolute,'' rather than a
"qualified,'' immunity). _Id.,_ at 750-751, 102 S.Ct., at 2701-2702. Second,
the Court held that "recognition of immunity'' does not require a "specific
textual basis'' in the Constitution. _Id.,_ at 750, n. 31, 102 S.Ct., at 2701,
n. 31. Third, although physical constraint of the President was not at issue,
the Court nevertheless considered Justice Story's constitutional analysis,
discussed _supra,_ at __, "persuasive.'' 457 U.S., at 749, 102 S.Ct., at 2701.
Fourth, the Court distinguished contrary precedent on the ground that it
involved criminal, not civil, proceedings. _Id.,_ at 754, and n. 37, 102
S.Ct., at 2703, and n. 37. Fifth, the Court's concerns encompassed the fact
that "the sheer prominence of the President's office'' could make him "an
easily identifiable target for suits for civil damages.'' _Id.,_ at 752-753,
102 S.Ct., at 2702-2703. Sixth, and most important, the Court rested its
conclusion in important part upon the fact that civil lawsuits "could distract
a President from his public duties, to the detriment of not only the President
and his office but also the Nation that the Presidency was designed to
serve.'' _Id.,_ at 753, 102 S.Ct., at 2703.

78

The majority argues that this critical, last-mentioned, feature of the case is
dicta. _Ante,_ at __, n. 19. In the majority's view, since the defendant was a
_former_ President, the lawsuit could not have _distracted_ him from his
official duties; hence the case must rest entirely upon an alternative
concern, namely that a President's fear of civil lawsuits based upon his
official duties could _distort_ his official decisionmaking. The majority,
however, overlooks the fact that _Fitzgerald_ set forth a single immunity (an
absolute immunity) applicable _both_ to sitting _and_ former Presidents. Its
reasoning focused upon both. Its key paragraph, explaining why the President
enjoys an absolute immunity rather than a qualified immunity, contains seven
sentences, four of which focus primarily upon time and energy _distraction_
and three of which focus primarily upon official decision _distortion._
Indeed, that key paragraph begins by stating:

79

"Because of the singular importance of the President's duties, diversion of
his energies by concern with private lawsuits would raise unique risks to the
effective functioning of government.'' 457 U.S., at 751, 102 S.Ct., at 2702.

80

Moreover, the Court, in numerous other cases, has found the problem of time
and energy distraction a critically important consideration militating in
favor of a grant of immunity. See, _e.g., Harlow v. Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S. 800,
817-818, 102 S.Ct. 2727, 2738, 73 L.Ed.2d 396 (1982) (qualified immunity for
Presidential assistants based in part on "costs of trial'' and "burdens of
broad-reaching discovery'' that are "peculiarly disruptive of effective
government''); _Imbler v. Pachtman,_ 424 U.S. 409, 423, 96 S.Ct. 984, 991, 47
L.Ed.2d 128 (1976) (absolute immunity of prosecutors based in part upon
concern about "deflection of the prosecutor's energies from his public
duties''); _Tenney v. Brandhove,_ 341 U.S. 367, 377, 71 S.Ct. 783, 788, 95
L.Ed. 1019 (1951) (absolute immunity for legislators avoids danger they will
"be subjected to the cost and inconvenience and distractions of a trial'').
Indeed, cases that provide public officials, not with immunity, but with
special protective procedures such as interlocutory appeals, rest _entirely_
upon a "time and energy distraction'' rationale. See _Behrens v. Pelletier,_
516 U.S. ----, 116 S.Ct. 834, 839, 133 L.Ed.2d 773 (1996) (" [G]overnment
official['s] right . . . to avoid standing trial [and] to avoid the burdens of
such _pretrial_ matters as discovery'' are sufficient to support an immediate
appeal from "denial of a claim of qualified immunity'') (citations and
internal quotation marks omitted); _Mitchell v. Forsyth,_ 472 U.S. 511, 526,
105 S.Ct. 2806, 2815, 86 L.Ed.2d 411 (1985) (" [E]ntitlement not to stand
trial or face the other burdens of litigation . . . is effectively lost if a
case is erroneously permitted to go to trial'') (citing _Harlow, supra,_ at
818, 102 S.Ct., at 2738).

81

It is not surprising that the Court's immunity-related case law should rely on
_both_ distraction and distortion, for the ultimate rationale underlying those
cases embodies both concerns. _See Pierson v. Ray,_ 386 U.S. 547, 554, 87
S.Ct. 1213, 1218, 18 L.Ed.2d 288 (1967) (absolute judicial immunity is needed
because of "burden'' of litigation, which leads to "intimidation''); _Bradley
v. Fisher,_ 13 Wall. 335, 349, 20 L.Ed. 646 (1872) (without absolute immunity
a judge's "office [would] be degraded and his usefulness destroyed'' and he
would be forced to shoulder "burden'' of keeping full records for use in
defending against suits). The cases ultimately turn on an assessment that the
threat that a civil damage lawsuit poses to a public official's ability to
perform his job properly. And, whether they provide an absolute immunity, a
qualified immunity, or merely a special procedure, they ultimately balance
consequent potential public harm against private need. Distraction and
distortion are equally important ingredients of that potential public harm.
Indeed, a lawsuit that significantly distracts an official from his public
duties can distort the content of a public decision just as can a threat of
potential future liability. If the latter concern can justify an "absolute''
immunity in the case of a President no longer in office, where distraction is
no longer a consideration, so can the former justify, not immunity, but a
postponement, in the case of a sitting President.

III

82

The majority points to the fact that private plaintiffs have brought civil
damage lawsuits against a sitting President only three times in our Nation's
history; and it relies upon the threat of sanctions to discourage, and "the
court's discretion'' to manage, such actions so that "interference with the
President's duties would not occur.'' _Ante,_ at __. I am less sanguine. Since
1960, when the last such suit was filed, the number of civil lawsuits filed
annually in Federal District Courts has increased from under 60,000 to about
240,000, see Administrative Office of the United States Courts, Statistical
Tables for the Federal Judiciary 27 (1995); Annual Report of the Director of
the Administrative Office of the United States Courts-1960, at p. 224 (1961);
the number of federal district judges has increased from 233 to about 650, see
Administrative Office of United States Courts, Judicial Business of United
States Courts 7 (1994); Annual Report of the Director of the Administrative
Office of the United States Courts-1960, _supra,_ at p. 205; the time and
expense associated with both discovery and trial have increased, see, _e.g.,_
Bell, Varner & Gottschalk, Automatic Disclosure in Discovery-The Rush To
Reform, 27 Ga. L.Rev. 1, 9-11 (1992); see also S.Rep. No. 101-416, p. 1
(1990); Judicial Improvements Act of 1990, Pub.L. 101-650, 104 Stat. 5089; an
increasingly complex economy has led to increasingly complex sets of statutes,
rules and regulations, that often create potential liability, with or without
fault. And this Court has now made clear that such lawsuits may proceed
against a sitting President. The consequence, as the Court warned in
_Fitzgerald,_ is that a sitting President, given "the visibility of his
office,'' could well become "an easily identifiable target for suits for civil
damages,'' 457 U.S., at 753, 102 S.Ct., at 2703. The threat of sanctions could
well discourage much unneeded litigation, _ante,_ at __, but some lawsuits
(including highly intricate and complicated ones) could resist ready
evaluation and disposition; and individual district court procedural rulings
could pose a significant threat to the President's official functions.

83

I concede the possibility that district courts, supervised by the Courts of
Appeals and perhaps this Court, might prove able to manage private civil
damage actions against sitting Presidents without significantly interfering
with the discharge of Presidential duties-at least if they manage those
actions with the constitutional problem in mind. Nonetheless, predicting the
future is difficult, and I am skeptical. Should the majority's optimism turn
out to be misplaced, then, in my view, courts will have to develop
administrative rules applicable to such cases (including postponement rules of
the sort at issue in this case) in order to implement the basic constitutional
directive. A Constitution that separates powers in order to prevent one branch
of Government from significantly threatening the workings of another could not
grant a single judge more than a very limited power to second guess a
President's reasonable determination (announced in open court) of his
scheduling needs, nor could it permit the issuance of a trial scheduling order
that would significantly interfere with the President's discharge of his
duties-in a private civil damage action the trial of which might be postponed
without the plaintiff suffering enormous harm. As Madison pointed out in The
Federalist No. 51, " [t]he great security against a gradual concentration of
the several powers in the same department consists in giving to those who
administer each department the necessary constitutional means and personal
motives to resist encroachments of the others. _The provision for defense must
in this, as in all other cases, be made commensurate to the danger of attack._
'' _Id.,_ at 321-322 (emphasis added). I agree with the majority's
determination that a constitutional defense must await a more specific showing
of need; I do not agree with what I believe to be an understatement of the
"danger.'' And I believe that ordinary case-management principles are unlikely
to prove sufficient to deal with private civil lawsuits for damages unless
supplemented with a constitutionally based requirement that district courts
schedule proceedings so as to avoid significant interference with the
President's ongoing discharge of his official responsibilities.

IV

84

This case is a private action for civil damages in which, as the District
Court here found, it is possible to preserve evidence and in which later
payment of interest can compensate for delay. The District Court in this case
determined that the Constitution required the postponement of trial during the
sitting President's term. It may well be that the trial of this case cannot
take place without significantly interfering with the President's ability to
carry out his official duties. Yet, I agree with the majority that there is no
automatic temporary immunity and that the President should have to provide the
District Court with a reasoned explanation of why the immunity is needed; and
I also agree that, in the absence of that explanation, the court's
postponement of the trial date was premature. For those reasons, I concur in
the result.

*

The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. See
_United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co.,_ 200 U.S. 321, 337, 26 S.Ct.
282, 287, 50 L.Ed. 499.

1

See 28 U.S.C. §1332\. Jurisdiction over the federal claims is authorized by 28
U.S.C. §§1331 and 1343.

2

Complaint ¶26.

3

As the matter is not before us, see _Jones v. Clinton,_ 72 F.3d 1354, 1359, n.
7 (C.A.8 1996), we do not address the question whether the President's
immunity from damages liability for acts taken within the "outer perimeter''
of his official responsibilities provides a defense to the fourth count of the
complaint. See _Nixon v. Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S. 731, 756, 102 S.Ct. 2690, 2704,
73 L.Ed.2d 349 (1982).

4

Record, Doc. No. 9; see 858 F.Supp. 902, 904 (E.D.Ark.1994).

5

See App. to Pet. for Cert. 53.

6

869 F.Supp., at 698. She explained: "Nowhere in the Constitution,
congressional acts, or the writings of any judge or scholar, may any credible
support for such a proposition be found. It is contrary to our form of
government, which asserts as did the English in the Magna Carta and the
Petition of Right, that even the sovereign is subject to God and the law.''
_Ibid._

7

Although, as noted above, the District Court's initial order permitted
discovery to go forward, the court later stayed discovery pending the outcome
of the appeals on the immunity issue. 879 F.Supp. 86 (E.D.Ark.1995).

8

Over the dissent of Judge McMillian, the Court of Appeals denied a suggestion
for rehearing en banc. 81 F.3d 78 (C.A.8 1996).

9

Brief for United States in Support of Petition 5.

10

Brief in Opposition 8, 10, 23.

11

As we have explained: ""If there is one doctrine more deeply rooted than any
other in the process of constitutional adjudication, it is that we ought not
to pass on questions of constitutionality . . . unless such adjudication is
unavoidable.' _Spector Motor Service v. McLaughlin,_ 323 U.S. 101, 105 [65
S.Ct. 152, 154, 89 L.Ed. 101 (1944)]. It has long been the Court's "considered
practice not to decide abstract, hypothetical or contingent questions . . . or
to decide any constitutional question in advance of the necessity for its
decision . . . or to formulate a rule of constitutional law broader than is
required by the precise facts to which it is to be applied . . . or to decide
any constitutional question except with reference to the particular facts to
which it is to be applied . . . . ' _Alabama State Federation of Labor v.
McAdory,_ 325 U.S. 450, 461 [65 S.Ct. 1384, 1389-1390, 89 L.Ed. 1725 (1945)].
"It is not the habit of the court to decide questions of a constitutional
nature unless absolutely necessary to a decision of the case.' _Burton v.
United States,_ 196 U.S. 283, 295 [25 S.Ct. 243, 245, 49 L.Ed. 482 (1905)].''
_Rescue Army v. Municipal Court of Los Angeles,_ 331 U.S. 549, 570, n. 34, 67
S.Ct. 1409, 1420, n. 34, 91 L.Ed. 1666 (1947).

12

The two questions presented in the certiorari petition are: "1. Whether the
litigation of a private civil damages action against an incumbent President
must in all but the most exceptional cases be deferred until the President
leaves office''; and "2. Whether a district court, as a proper exercise of
judicial discretion, may stay such litigation until the President leaves
office.'' Our review is confined to these issues. See this Court's Rule
14.1(a).

13

Because the Supremacy Clause makes federal law "the supreme Law of the Land,''
Art. VI, cl. 2, any direct control by a state court over the President, who
has principal responsibility to ensure that those laws are "faithfully
executed,'' Art. II, §3, may implicate concerns that are quite different from
the interbranch separation of powers questions addressed here. Cf., _e.g.,
Hancock v. Train,_ 426 U.S. 167, 178-179, 96 S.Ct. 2006, 2012-2013, 48 L.Ed.2d
555 (1976); _Mayo v. United States,_ 319 U.S. 441, 445, 63 S.Ct. 1137,
1139-1140, 87 L.Ed. 1504 (1943). See L. Tribe, American Constitutional Law 513
(2d ed.1988) ("absent explicit congressional consent no state may command
federal officials . . . to take action in derogation of their . . . federal
responsibilities'').

14

Although Presidents have responded to written interrogatories, given
depositions, and provided videotaped trial testimony, see _infra,_ at __, no
sitting President has ever testified, or been ordered to testify, in open
court.

15

See _People ex rel. Hurley v. Roosevelt,_ 179 N.Y. 544, 71 N.E. 1137 (1904);
_DeVault v. Truman,_ 354 Mo. 1193, 194 S.W.2d 29 (1946).

16

See _Bailey v. Kennedy,_ No. 757,200 (Cal.Super.Ct.1960); _Hills v. Kennedy,_
No. 757,201 (Cal.Super.Ct.1960).

17

See 72 F.3d, at 1362, n. 10.

18

Some of these cases defined the immunities of state and local officials in
actions filed under 42 U.S.C. §1983\. See, _e.g., Imbler v. Pachtman,_ 424
U.S. 409, 422-423, 96 S.Ct. 984, 991-992, 47 L.Ed.2d 128 (1976) (prosecutorial
immunity); _Tenney v. Brandhove,_ 341 U.S. 367, 376-377, 71 S.Ct. 783, 788, 95
L.Ed. 1019 (1951) (legislative immunity); _Pierson v. Ray,_ 386 U.S. 547,
554-555, 87 S.Ct. 1213, 1217-1218, 18 L.Ed.2d 288 (1967) (judicial immunity).
The rationale underlying our official immunity jurisprudence in cases alleging
constitutional violations brought against federal officials is similar. See,
_e.g., Butz v. Economou,_ 438 U.S. 478, 500-501, 98 S.Ct. 2894, 2907-2908, 57
L.Ed.2d 895 (1978).

19

Petitioner draws our attention to _dicta_ in _Fitzgerald,_ which he suggests
are helpful to his cause. We noted there that " [b]ecause of the singular
importance of the President's duties, diversion of his energies by concern
with private lawsuits would raise unique risks to the effective functioning of
government,'' 457 U.S., at 751, 102 S.Ct., at 2702, and suggested further that
" [c]ognizance of . . . personal vulnerability frequently could distract a
President from his public duties,'' _id.,_ at 753, 102 S.Ct., at 2703.
Petitioner argues that in this aspect the Court's concern was parallel to the
issue he suggests is of great importance in this case, the possibility that a
sitting President might be distracted by the need to participate in litigation
during the pendency of his office. In context, however, it is clear that our
dominant concern was with the diversion of the President's attention during
the decisionmaking process caused by needless worry as to the possibility of
damages actions stemming from any particular official decision. Moreover,
_Fitzgerald_ did not present the issue raised in this case because that
decision involved claims against a _former_ President.

20

In Jefferson's view, the subpoena jeopardized the separation of powers by
subjecting the Executive Branch to judicial command. See 10 Works of Thomas
Jefferson 404, n. (P. Ford ed.1905); _Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S., at 751, n. 31,
102 S.Ct., at 2702, n. 31 (quoting Jefferson's comments).

21

9 Documentary History of First Federal Congress of the United States 168 (K.
Bowling & H. Veit eds., 1988) (Diary of William Maclay).

22

See 3 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States §1563,
pp. 418-419 (1833).

23

Jefferson's argument provides little support for respondent's position. As we
explain later, the prerogative Jefferson claimed was denied him by the Chief
Justice in the very decision Jefferson was protesting, and this Court has
subsequently reaffirmed that holding. See _United States v. Nixon,_ 418 U.S.
683, 94 S.Ct. 3090, 41 L.Ed.2d 1039 (1974). The statements supporting a
similar proposition recorded in Senator Maclay's diary are inconclusive of the
issue before us here for the same reason. In addition, this material is hardly
proof of the unequivocal common understanding at the time of the founding.
Immediately after mentioning the positions of Adams and Ellsworth, Maclay went
on to point out in his diary that he virulently disagreed with them,
concluding that his opponents' view " [s]hows clearly how amazingly fond of
the old leven many People are.'' Diary of Maclay 168.

Finally, Justice Story's comments in his constitutional law treatise provide
no substantial support for respondent's position. Story wrote that because the
President's "incidental powers'' must include "the power to perform [his
duties], without any obstruction,'' he "cannot, therefore, be liable to
arrest, imprisonment, or detention, while he is in the discharge of the duties
of his office; and _for this purpose_ his person must be deemed, in civil
cases at least, to possess an official inviolability.'' 3 Story, §1563, at
418-419 (emphasis added). Story said only that " _an_ official
inviolability,'' _ibid._ (emphasis added), was necessary to preserve the
President's ability to perform the functions of the office; he did not specify
the dimensions of the necessary immunity. While we have held that an immunity
from suits grounded on official acts is necessary to serve this purpose, see
_Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S., at 749, 102 S.Ct., at 2701, it does not follow that
the broad immunity from _all_ civil damages suits that petitioner seeks is
also necessary.

24

For that reason, the argument does not place any reliance on the English
ancestry that informs our common-law jurisprudence; he does not claim the
prerogatives of the monarchs who asserted that " [t]he King can do no wrong.''
See 1 W. Blackstone, Commentaries *246. Although w e have adopted the related
doctrine of sovereign immunity, the common-law fiction that " [t]he king . . .
is not only incapable of _doing_ wrong, but even of _thinking_ wrong,''
_ibid.,_ was rejected at the birth of the Republic. See, _e.g., Nevada v.
Hall,_ 440 U.S. 410, 415, and nn. 7-8, 99 S.Ct. 1182, 1185, and nn. 7-8, 59
L.Ed.2d 416 (1970); _Langford v. United States,_ 101 U.S. 341, 342-343, 25
L.Ed. 1010 (1880).

25

See, _e.g.,_ A. Tourtellot, The Presidents on the Presidency 346-374 (1964)
(citing comments of, among others, George Washington, John Quincy Adams,
Benjamin Harrison, Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Woodrow
Wilson); H. Finer, The Presidency: Crisis and Regeneration 35-37 (1960)
(citing similar remarks by a number of Presidents, including James Monroe,
James K. Polk, and Harry Truman).

26

L. Johnson, The Vantage Point 425 (1971).

27

The Amendment sets forth, _inter alia,_ an elaborate procedure for
Presidential succession in the event that the Chief Executive becomes
incapacitated. See U.S. Const., Amdt. 25, §§3-4.

28

111 Cong. Rec. 15595 (1965) (remarks of Sen. Bayh).

29

We noted in _Fitzgerald:_ "Article II, §1, of the Constitution provides that
"[t]he executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United States . .
. . ' This grant of authority establishes the President as the chief
constitutional officer of the Executive Branch, entrusted with supervisory and
policy responsibilities of utmost discretion and sensitivity. These include
the enforcement of federal law-it is the President who is charged
constitutionally to "take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed'; the
conduct of foreign affairs-a realm in which the Court has recognized that
"[i]t would be intolerable that courts, without the relevant information,
should review and perhaps nullify actions of the Executive taken on
information properly held secret'; and management of the Executive Branch-a
task for which "imperative reasons requir[e] an unrestricted power [in the
President] to remove the most important of his subordinates in their most
important duties.''' 457 U.S., at 749-750, 102 S.Ct., at 2701 (footnotes
omitted).

30

See _Loving v. United States,_ 517 U.S. ----, ----, 116 S.Ct. 1737, 1742-1743,
135 L.Ed.2d 36 (1996); _Mistretta v. United States,_ 488 U.S. 361, 382, 109
S.Ct. 647, 660, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 (1989) ("concern of encroachment and
aggrandizement . . . has animated our separation-of-powers jurisprudence'');
The Federalist No. 51, p. 349 (J. Cooke ed.1961) ("the great security against
a gradual concentration of the several powers in the same department, consists
in giving to those who administer each department the necessary constitutional
means, and personal motives, to resist encroachments of the others'').

31

See also _United States v. Klein,_ 13 Wall. 128, 147, 20 L.Ed. 519 (1872)
(noting that Congress had "inadvertently passed the limit which separates the
legislative from the judicial power'').

32

See also _Bowsher v. Synar,_ 478 U.S. 714, 726, 106 S.Ct. 3181, 3188, 92
L.Ed.2d 583 (1986) ("structure of the Constitution does not permit Congress to
execute the laws''). Cf. _INS v. Chadha,_ 462 U.S. 919, 958, 103 S.Ct. 2764,
2787-2788, 77 L.Ed.2d 317 (1983); _Springer v. Philippine Islands,_ 277 U.S.
189, 202-203, 48 S.Ct. 480, 482-483, 72 L.Ed. 845 (1928).

33

See _United States v. Ferreira,_ 13 How. 40, 14 L.Ed. 40 (1852); _Hayburn's
Case,_ 2 Dall. 408, 1 L.Ed. 436 (1792). As we explained in _Chicago & Southern
Air Lines, Inc. v. Waterman S.S. Corp.,_ 333 U.S. 103, 113, 68 S.Ct. 431, 437,
92 L.Ed. 568 (1948), " [t]his Court early and wisely determined that it would
not give advisory opinions even when asked by the Chief Executive.'' More
generally, "we have broadly stated that "executive or administrative duties of
a nonjudicial nature may not be imposed on judges holding office under Art.
III of the Constitution.''' _Morrison v. Olson,_ 487 U.S. 654, 677, 108 S.Ct.
2597, 2612, 101 L.Ed.2d 569 (1988) (quoting _Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1,
123, 96 S.Ct. 612, 684, 46 L.Ed.2d 659 (1976)). These restrictions on judicial
activities "help ensure the independence of the Judicial Branch and to prevent
the Judiciary from encroaching into areas reserved for the other branches.''
487 U.S., at 678, 108 S.Ct., at 2612; see also _Mistretta v. United States,_
488 U.S. 361, 385, 109 S.Ct. 647, 662, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 (1989).

34

We have long held that the federal courts may not resolve such matters. See,
_e.g., Luther v. Borden,_ 7 How. 1, 12 L.Ed. 581 (1849). As we explained in
_Nixon v. United States,_ 506 U.S. 224, 113 S.Ct. 732, 122 L.Ed.2d 1 (1993), "
[a] controversy is nonjusticiable- _i.e.,_ involves a political question-where
there is a "textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a
coordinate political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable and
manageable standards for resolving it . . . . ' _Baker v. Carr,_ 369 U.S. 186,
217 [82 S.Ct. 691, 710, 7 L.Ed.2d 663] (1962). But the courts must, in the
first instance, interpret the text in question and determine whether and to
what extent the issue is textually committed. See _ibid.; Powell v.
McCormack,_ 395 U.S. 486, 519 [89 S.Ct. 1944, 1962-1963, 23 L.Ed.2d 491]
(1969).'' _Id.,_ at 228, 113 S.Ct., at 735.

35

See also _Olson,_ 487 U.S., at 693-694, 108 S.Ct., at 2620-2621; _Nixon v.
Administrator of General Services,_ 433 U.S. 425, 443, 97 S.Ct. 2777, 2790, 53
L.Ed.2d 867 (1977); _United States v. Nixon,_ 418 U.S. 683, 707, 94 S.Ct.
3090, 3107, 41 L.Ed.2d 1039 (1974); _Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,_
343 U.S. 579, 635, 72 S.Ct. 863, 870, 96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952) (Jackson, J.,
concurring).

36

In _Fitzgerald,_ we were able to discount the lack of historical support for
the proposition that official-capacity actions against the President posed a
serious threat to the office on the ground that a right to sue federal
officials for damages as a result of constitutional violations had only
recently been recognized. See _Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S., at 753, n. 33, 102
S.Ct., at 2703, n. 33; _Bivens v. Six Unknown Named Fed. Narcotics Agents,_
403 U.S. 388, 91 S.Ct. 1999, 29 L.Ed.2d 619 (1971). The situation with respect
to suits against the President for actions taken in his private capacity is
quite different because such suits may be grounded on legal theories that have
always been applicable to any potential defendant. Moreover, because the
President has contact with far fewer people in his private life than in his
official capacity, the class of potential plaintiffs is considerably smaller
and the risk of litigation less intense.

37

The Federalist No. 47, Pp. ___-___ (J. Cooke ed.1961) (emphasis in original).
See _Mistretta,_ 488 U.S., at 381, 109 S.Ct., at 659-660; _Nixon v.
Administrator of General Services,_ 433 U.S., at 442, n. 5, 97 S.Ct., at 2789,
n. 5.

38

After the decision was rendered, Jefferson expressed his distress in a letter
to a prosecutor at the trial, noting that " [t]he Constitution enjoins [the
President's] constant agency in the concerns of 6. millions of people.'' 10
Works of Thomas Jefferson 404, n. (P. Ford ed.1905). He asked, " [i]s the law
paramount to this, which calls on him on behalf of a single one?'' _Ibid.;_
see also _Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S., at 751-752, n. 31, 102 S.Ct., at 2702, n. 31
(quoting Jefferson's comments at length). For Chief Justice Marshall, the
answer-quite plainly-was yes.

39

Of course, it does not follow that a court may ""proceed against the president
as against an ordinary individual,''' _United States v. Nixon,_ 418 U.S., at
715, 94 S.Ct., at 3111 (quoting _United States v. Burr,_ 25 F.Cas. 187, 192
(No. 14,694) (C.C.Va. 1807)). Special caution is appropriate if the materials
or testimony sought by the court relate to a President's official activities,
with respect to which " [t]he interest in preserving confidentiality is
weighty indeed and entitled to great respect.'' 418 U.S., at 712, 94 S.Ct., at
3109. We have made clear that in a criminal case the powerful interest in the
"fair administration of criminal justice'' requires that the evidence be given
under appropriate circumstances lest the "very integrity of the judicial
system'' be eroded. _Id.,_ at 709, 711-712, 94 S.Ct., at 3108, 3109.

40

There is, no doubt, some truth to Learned Hand's comment that a lawsuit should
be "dread[ed] . . . beyond almost anything else short of sickness and death.''
3 Association of the Bar of the City of New York, Lectures on Legal Topics 105
(1926). We recognize that a President, like any other official or private
citizen, may become distracted or preoccupied by pending litigation.
Presidents and other officials face a variety of demands on their time,
however, some private, some political, and some as a result of official duty.
While such distractions may be vexing to those subjected to them, they do not
ordinarily implicate constitutional separation of powers concerns.

41

Although these claims are in fact analytically distinct, the District Court
does not appear to have drawn that distinction. Rather than basing its
decision on particular factual findings that might have buttressed an exercise
of discretion, the District Court instead suggested that a discretionary stay
was supported by the _legal conclusion_ that such a stay was required by
_Fitzgerald._ See 869 F.Supp., at 699. We therefore reject petitioner's
argument that we lack jurisdiction over respondent's cross-appeal from the
District Court's alternative holding that its decision was "also permitted,''
_inter alia,_ "under the equity powers of the Court.'' _Ibid._ The Court of
Appeals correctly found that pendant appellate jurisdiction over this issue
was proper. See 72 F.3d, at 1357, n. 4. The District Court's legal ruling that
the President was protected by a temporary immunity from trial-but not
discovery-was "inextricably intertwined,'' _Swint v. Chambers County Comm'n,_
514 U.S. 35, 51, 115 S.Ct. 1203, 1212, 131 L.Ed.2d 60 (1995), with its
suggestion that a discretionary stay having the same effect might be proper;
indeed, "review of the [latter] decision [is] necessary to ensure meaningful
review of the [former],'' _ibid._

42

See, _e.g.,_ Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 11; 28 U.S.C. §1927; _Chambers v. NASCO,
Inc.,_ 501 U.S. 32, 50, 111 S.Ct. 2123, 2136, 115 L.Ed.2d 27 (1991) (noting
that "if in the informed discretion of the court, neither the statute nor the
Rules are up to the task, the court may safely rely on its inherent power'' in
imposing appropriate sanctions). Those sanctions may be set at a level
"sufficient to deter repetition of such conduct or comparable conduct by
others similarly situated.'' Fed. Rule Civ. Proc. 11(c)(2). As Rule 11
indicates, sanctions may be appropriate where a claim is "presented for any
improper purpose, such as to harass,'' including any claim based on
"allegations and other factual contentions [lacking] evidentiary support'' or
unlikely to prove well-grounded after reasonable investigation. Rules
11(b)(1), (3).

43

_United States v. Nixon,_ 418 U.S., at 710-711, 94 S.Ct., at 3108-3109; see
also _Fitzgerald,_ 457 U.S., at 753, 102 S.Ct., at 2703 ("Courts traditionally
have recognized the President's constitutional responsibilities and status as
factors counseling judicial deference and restraint'').

