186 U.S. 380

22 S.Ct. 811

46 L.Ed. 1209

COMPAGNIE FRANCAISE DE NAVIGATION A VAPEUR, _Plff. in Err._ ,  
v.  
STATE BOARD OF HEALTH, LOUISIANA, _et al._

No. 4.

Argued October 29, 30, 1900.

Decided June 2, 1902.

This action was commenced in the state court against the board of health of
the state of Louisiana and three persons who were members of said board, and
whom it was sought to hold individually responsible for damages alleged to
have been suffered from the enforcement of a resolution adopted by the board
upon the theory that the resolution referred to was _ultra vires_ , and hence
the members of the board who voted for it were personally liable for any
damages occasioned by the enforcement of the resolution. The board was thus
described in the petition:

'That the defendant the state board of health was a body created by act No.
192 of the general assembly of the state of Louisiana of the year 1898, with
power to sue and be sued, domiciled in this city (the city of New Orleans),
and composed of seven members, whose duty it was, by the provisions of said
act, to protect and preserve the public health by preparing and promulgating a
sanitary code for the state of Louisiana, by providing for the general
sanitation of the state, and with authority to regulate infectious and
contagious diseases and to prescribe a maritime and land quarantine against
places infected with such diseases.'

It was asserted that the plaintiff, a corporation created by and existing
under the laws of the Republic of France and a citizen of said Republic, on or
about September 2, 1898, caused its steamship Britannia to be cleared from the
ports of Marseilles, France, and Palermo, Italy, for New Orleans with a cargo
of merchandise and with about 408 passengers, some of whom were citizens of
the United States returning home, and others who were seeking homes in the
United States, and who intended to settle in the state of Louisiana or
adjoining states, and that all the passengers referred to at the time of their
sailing were free from infectious or contagious diseases. It was further
averred that on September 29, 1898, the vessel arrived at the quarantine
station some distance below the city of New Orleans, was there regularly
inspected, and was found, both as to the passengers and cargo, to be free from
any infectious or contagious disease, and accordingly was given a clean bill
of health, whereby the ship became entitled to proceed to New Orleans and land
her passengers and discharge her cargo. This, however, it was asserted she was
not permitted to do, because, on the date last mentioned, at a meeting held by
the board of health, the following resolution was adopted:

' _Resolved_ , That hereafter in the case of any town, city, or parish of
Louisiana being declared in quarantine, no body or bodies of people,
immigrants, soldiers, or others shall be allowed to enter said town, city, or
parish so long as said quarantine shall exist, and that the president of the
board shall enforce this resolution.'

It was charged that in order to enforce this resolution the president of the
board of health, who was one of the individual defendants, instructed the
quarantine officer to detain the Britannia at the quarantine station, and the
president of the board addressed to the agent of the steamship the following
communication explanatory of the detention of the vessel:

'Referring to the detention of the SS. Britannia at the Mississippi river
quarantine station, with 408 Italian immigrants on board, I have to inform you
that under the provisions of the new state board of health law, ยง 8, of which
I inclose a marked copy, this board has adopted a resolution forbidding the
landing of any body of people in any town, city, or parish in quarantine.
Under this resolution the immigrants now on board the Britannia cannot be
landed in any of the following parishes of Louisiana, namely: Orleans, St.
Bernard, Jefferson (right bank), St. Tammany, Plaquemines, St. Charles, or St.
John. You will therefore govern yourselves accordingly.'

The president of the board of health, it was alleged, moreover notified that
agent of the ship that if an attempt was made to land the passengers at any
place contiguous to New Orleans, such place not being in quarantine, a
quarantine against such place would be declared, and thus the landing be
prevented.

It was averred that while the resolution of the board of health purported on
its face to be general in its operation, in truth it was passed with the sole
object of preventing the landing of the passengers from the Britannia, and
this was demonstrated because no attempt was made by the board of health to
enforce the provisions of the resolution against immigrants from Italy coming
into the United States _via_ the port of New York and thence reaching New
Orleans by rail, and that after the promulgation of said resolution 'more than
200 such persons varying in groups of 30 to 100 in number, have from time to
time been permitted to enter said city.' It was averred that the action of the
board was not authorized by the state law, and if it was, such law was void
because repugnant to the provision of the Constitution of the United States
conferring upon Congress power 'to regulate commerce with foreign nations, and
among the several states and with the Indian tribes.' Averring that damage had
been already entailed to the extent of $2,500, for which not only the board,
but its members who voted for the resolution, were liable, and reserving the
right to claim such future damage as might be entailed by the further
enforcement of the resolution, the petition asked for an injunction
restraining the enforcement of the resolution in question, and prayed judgment
against the board and the members named for $2,500 _in solido_.

The court declined to allow a preliminary restraining order, and upon a
hearing on a rule to show cause, the injunction was refused. The order of the
board of health, which was complained of, continued, therefore, to be enforced
against the ship. Subsequently the plaintiff filed a supplemental and amended
petition. It was reiterated that the immigrant passengers on board the
Britannia were free from disease when they shipped and at the time of their
arrival, and, in addition, it was alleged that the steamer with the immigrants
on board had sailed from her port of departure 'prior to the declaration by
said board of health of the existence of any infectious disease in the city of
New Orleans.' It was alleged that, in consequence of the insistence of the
board of health and its members, in enforcing the illegal order refusing to
allow the landing of the immigrant passengers, the steamer had been obliged to
proceed to Pensacola, Florida, where they were landed, and then the steamer
returned to New Orleans for the purpose of discharging cargo. The damage
resulting was averred to be $8,500, besides the $2,500 previously claimed, and
a judgment for this amount, in addition to the previous sum, was also asked
_in solido_ against the board and the members thereof, who were individually
made defendants. It was, moreover, averred that the action of the board was
'in violation of the laws of the United States, and the rules and regulations
made in pursuance thereof, relating to quarantine and immigration from foreign
countries into ports of the United States, and especially acts of Congress
approved February 15, 1893, and acts of Congress of March the 3d, 1893, August
the 3d, 1882, and June the 26th, 1884, and the rules and regulations made in
pursuance thereof, and of the treaties now existing between the United States,
on the one part, and the Kingdom of Italy and the Republic of France on the
other part.'

The defendants filed a peremptory exception of no cause of action, which was
sustained by the trial court, and the suit was therefore dismissed. On appeal
to the supreme court of the state of Louisiana the judgment of the trial court
was affirmed. 51 La. Ann. 645, 25 So. 591.

_Messrs._ _W. B. Spencer_ and _W. W. Howe_ for plaintiff in error.

_Mr._ _F. C. Zacharie_ for defendants in error.

Mr. Justice White, after making the foregoing statement, delivered the opinion
of the court:

1

The law of Louisiana, under which the board of health exerted the authority
which is complained of, is found in ยง 8 of act No. 192, enacted in 1898. The
portion of the section which is essential is as follows, the provision which
is more directly pertinent to the case in hand being italicized:

2

'In case that any parish, town, or city, or any portion thereof, shall become
infected with any contagious or infectious disease, to such an extent as to
threaten the spread of such disease to the other portions of the state, the
state board of health shall issue its proclamation declaring the facts and
ordering it in quarantine, and shall order the local boards of health in other
parishes, towns, and cities to quarantine against said locality, and shall
establish and promulgate the rules and regulations, terms and conditions on
which intercourse with said infected locality shall be permitted, and shall
issue to the other local sanitary authorities instructions as to the measures
adopted in quarantining against persons, goods, or other property coming from
said infected localities, and these rules and regulations, terms and
conditions shall be observed and obeyed by all other health authorities,
provided that should any other of the noninfected portion of the state desire
to add to the regulations and rules, terms and conditions already imposed by
the state board, they do so on the approval of the state board of health. _The
state board of health may, in its discretion, prohibit the introduction into
any infected portion of the state, persons acclimated, unacclimated, or said
to be immune, when in its judgment the introduction of such persons would add
to or increase the prevalence of the disease_. The state board of health shall
render the local boards of health all the assistance in their power and which
the condition of their finances will permit.'

3

The supreme court of the state of Louisiana, interpreting this statute, held
that it empowered the board to exclude healthy persons from a locality
infested with a contagious or infectious disease, and that this power was
intended to apply as well to persons seeking to enter the infected place,
whether they came from without or from within the state. The court said:

4

'The law does not limit the board to prohibiting the introduction of persons
from one portion of the state to another and an infected portion of the state,
but evidently looked as well to the prohibition of the introduction of persons
from points outside of the state into any infected portion of the state. As
the object in view would be 'to accomplish the subsidence and suppression of
the infectious and contagious diseases, and to prevent the spread of the
same,' it would be difficult to see why parties from outside of the state
should be permitted to enter into infected places, while those from the
different parishes should be prevented from holding intercourse with each
other.

5

'The object in view was to keep down, as far as possible, the number of
persons to be brought within danger of contagion or infection, and by means of
this reduction to accomplish the subsidence and suppression of the disease and
the spread of the same.

6

'The particular places from which the parties, who were to be prohibited from
entering the infected district or districts, came could have no possible
influence upon the attainment of the result sought to be attained.

7

'It would make no possible difference whether this 'added fuel' sought to be
excluded should come from Louisiana, New York, or Europe.'

8

Referring to past conditions and the public dangers which had arisen from
them, the evil which the statute of 1898 was intended to remedy was pointed
out as follows:

9

'During the fall of 1897, and during the existence of an epidemic, a vessel
arrived in the Mississippi river with immigrants aboard under conditions
similar to those under which the 'Britannia' reached the same stream in 1898.

10

'The excited public discussions at the time as to the right of the state
board, under the then existing law, to prevent the landing of the immigrants
and as to its duty in the premises, were so extended as to authorize us to
take judicial notice of the fact, and in our opinion the clause in the present
act which covers that precise matter was inserted therein for the express
purpose of placing the particular question outside of the range of
controversy.

11

'For a number of years past immigrants have been coming into New Orleans in
the autumn from Italy.

12

'There was a probability when the general assembly met in 1898 that the
epidemic of 1897 might be repeated, and a great probability that immigrants
would seek to enter, as they had done the year before, to the great danger,
not only of the people of Louisiana, but of the immigrants themselves.

13

'Independently of this, there was great danger to be apprehended from the
increasing intercourse between New Orleans and the West India islands in
consequence of a war with Spain.

14

'It was to ward off these dangers that this particular provision was inserted
in the act of 1898.'

15

And by implication from the reasoning just referred to the existence of the
conditions rendering it necessary to call the power into play in the case
before it was recognized. Thus construing the statute, the state court held
that it was not repugnant to the Constitution of the United States and was not
in conflict with any law or treaty of the United States. These latter
considerations present the questions which arise for our decision. All the
assignments of error relied upon to show the invalidity of the statute of the
state of Louisiana, and hence the illegality of the action of the board of
health from the point of view of Federal considerations, are, in the argument
at barsummarized in four propositions. We shall consider them separately and
thus dispose of the case. In doing so, however, as the first and second
contentions both rest upon the assertion that the statute violates the
Constitution of the United States, we shall treat them together.

16

'First. The statute drawn in question, on its face and as construed and
applied, is void for the reason that it is in violation of art. 1, ยง 3, ยถ8, of
the Constitution of the United States, inasmuch as it vests authority in the
state board of health, in its discretion, to interfere with or prohibit
interstate and foreign commerce.

17

'Second. The statute is void for inasmuch as it is in conflict with ยง 1 of the
14th article of Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, in that it
deprives the plaintiff of its liberty and property without due process of law,
and denies to it the equal protection of the law.'

18

That from an early day the power of the states to enact and enforce quarantine
laws for the safety and the protection of the health of their inhabitants has
been recognized by Congress, is beyond question. That until Congress has
exercised its power on the subject, such state quarantine laws and state laws
for the purpose of preventing, eradicating, or controlling the spread of
contagious or infectious diseases, are not repugnant to the Constitution of
the United States, although their operation affects interstate or foreign
commerce, is not an open question. The doctrine was elaborately examined and
stated in _Morgan's L. & T. R. & S. S. Co._ v. _Louisiana Bd. of Health,_ 118
U. S. 455, 30 L. ed. 237, 6 Sup. Ct. Rep. 1114. That case involved determining
whether a quarantine law enacted by the state of Louisiana was repugnant to
the commerce clause of the Constitution because of its necessary effect upon
interstate and foreign commerce. The court said:

19

'Is the law under consideration void as a regulation of commerce? Undoubtedly
it is in some sense a regulation of commerce. It arrests a vessel on a voyage
which may have been a long one. It may affect commerce among the states when
the vessel is coming from some other state of the Union than Louisiana, and it
may affect commerce with foreign nations when the vessel arrested comes from a
foreign port. This interruption of the voyage may be for days or for weeks. It
extends to the vessel, the cargo, the officers and seamen, and the passengers.
In so far as it provides a rule by which this power is exercised, it cannot be
denied that it regulates commerce. We do not think it necessary to enter into
the inquiry whether, notwithstanding this, it is to be classed among those
police powers which were retained by the states as exclusively their own, and,
therefore, not ceded to Congress. For, while it may be a police power in the
sense that all provisions for the health, comfort, and security of the
citizens are police regulations, and an exercise of the police power, it has
been said more than once in this court that, even where such powers are so
exercised as to come within the domain of Federal authority as defined by the
Constitution, the latter must prevail. _Gibbons_ v. _Ogden_ , 9 Wheat, 1, 210,
6 L. ed. 23, 73; _Henderson_ v. _New York_ , 92 U. S. 259, 272, _sub nom.
Henderson_ v. _Wickham_ , 23 L. ed. 543; _New Orleans Gaslight Co._ v.
_Louisiana Light & H. P & Mfg. Co._ 115 U. S. 650, 661, 29 L. ed. 516, 520, 6
Sup. Ct. Rep. 252.

20

'But it may be conceded that whenever Congress shall undertake to provide for
the commercial cities of the United States, a general system of quarantine, or
shall confide the execution of the details of such a system to a national
board of health, or to local boards, as may be found expedient, all state laws
on the subject will be abrogated, at least so far as the two are inconsistent.
But, until this is done, the laws of the state on the subject are valid. This
follows from two reasons:

21

'1. The act of 1799, the main features of which are embodied in title LVIII.
of the Revised Statutes, clearly recognizes the quarantine laws of the states,
and requires of the officers of the Treasury a conformity to their provisions
in dealing with vessels affected by the quarantine system. And this very
clearly has relation to laws created after the passage of that statute, as
well as to those then in existence; and when, by the act of April 29, 1878 (20
Stat. at L. 37, chap. 66), certain powers in this direction were conferred on
the Surgeon General of the Marine Hospital Service, and consuls and revenue
officers were required to contribute services in preventing the importation of
disease, it was provided that 'there shall be no interference in any manner
with any quarantine laws or regulations as they now exist or may hereafter be
adopted under state laws,' showing very clearly the intention of Congress to
adopt these laws or to recognize the power of the states to pass them.

22

'2. But, aside from this, quarantine laws belong to that class of state
legislation which, whether passed with intent to regulate commerce or not,
must be admitted to have that effect, and which are valid until displaced or
contravened by some legislation of Congress.'

23

Again, in _Louisiana_ v. _Texas_ , 176 U. S. 1, 21, 44 L. ed. 347, 355, 20
Sup. Ct. Rep. 251, 258, the court was called upon to consider a quarantine law
of the state of Texas which by its terms was applicable to and was enforced as
to both interstate and foreign commerce. After referring approvingly to the
case which we have above cited, the court, speaking through Mr. Chief Justice
Fuller, said:

24

'It is not charged that this statute is invalid, nor could it be if tested by
its terms. While it is true that the power vested in Congress to regulate
commerce among the states is a power complete in itself, acknowledging no
limitations other than those prescribed in the Constitution, and that where
the action of the states in the exercise of their reserve powers comes into
collision with it, the latter must give way, yet it is also true that
quarantine laws belong to that class of state legislation which is valid until
displaced by Congress, and that such legislation has been expressly recognized
by the laws of the United States almost from the beginning of the government.'

25

Further, in calling attention to the fact, as remarked by the court in
_Morgan's L. & T. R. & S. S. Co._ v. _Louisiana Bd. of Health_ , 118 U. S.
455, 30 L. ed. 237, 6 Sup. Ct. Rep. 1114, that in the nature of things
quarantine laws and laws relating to public health must necessarily vary with
the different localities of the country, it was said:

26

'Hence, even if Congress had remained silent on the subject it would not have
followed that the exercise of the police power of the state in this regard,
although necessarily operating on interstate commerce, would be therefore
invalid. Although from the nature and subjects of the power of regulating
commerce it must be ordinarily exercised by the national government
exclusively, this has not been held to be so where, in relation to the
particular subject-matter, different rules might be suitable in different
localities. At the same time, Congress could by affirmative action displace
the local laws, substitute laws of its own, and thus correct any unjustifiable
and oppressive exercise of power by state legislation.'

27

Despite these conclusive adjudications, it is earnestly insisted in the
argument at bar that by a correct appreciation of all the decisions of this
court on the subject, the rule will be discovered to be that the states may
enact quarantine or other health laws for the protection of their inhabitants,
but that such laws, if they operate upon or directly affect interstate or
foreign commerce, are repugnant to the Constitution of the United States
independently of whether Congress has legislated on such subjects. To sustain
this contention a most copious reference is made to many cases decided by this
court, where the nature and extent of the power of Congress to regulate
commerce was considered and the validity of state legislation asserted to be
repugnant to such power was passed upon. To analyze and review the numerous
cases referred to in order to point out their want of relation to the question
in hand would involve in effect a review of the whole subject of the power of
Congress to regulate commerce in every possible aspect, and an analysis of
practically the greater body of cases which have in this court involved that
serious and difficult subject from the beginning. We shall not undertake to do
so, but content ourselves with saying, after duly considering the cases relied
upon, that we find them inapposite to the doctrine they are cited to sustain,
and hence, when they are correctly appreciated, none of them conflict with the
settled rule announced by this court in the cases to which we have referred.

28

The confusion of thought which has given rise to the misconception of the
authorities relied upon in the argument, and which has caused it to be
supposed that they are apposite to the case in hand, is well illustrated by
the premise upon which the proposition that the cited authorities are
applicable rests. That proposition is thus stated in the printed argument
(italics in the original): 'Turning now to the decisions of this court, it
will be found that the basis upon which it has upheld the exclusion,
inspection, and quarantine laws of various states, is that criminals, diseased
persons and things, and paupers, _are not legitimate subjects of commerce_.
They may be attendant evils, but they are not legitimate subjects of traffic
and transportation, and therefore, in their exclusion or detention, the state
is not interfering with _legitimate_ commerce, which is the only kind entitled
to the protection of the Constitution.'

29

But it must be at once observed that this erroneously states the doctrine as
concluded by the decisions of this court previously referred to, since the
proposition ignores the fact that those cases expressly and unequivocally hold
that the health and quarantine laws of the several states are not repugnant to
the Constitution of the United States, although they affect foreign and
domestic commerce, as in many cases they necessarily must do in order to be
efficacious, because until Congress has acted under the authority conferred
upon it by the Constitution, such state health and quarantine laws producing
such effect on legitimate interstate commerce are not in conflict with the
Constitution. True it is that, in some of the cases relied on in the argument,
it was held that a state law absolutely prohibiting the introduction, under
all circumstances, of objects actually affected with disease, was valid
because such objects were not legitimate commerce. But this implies no
limitation on the power to regulate by health laws the subjects of legitimate
commerce. In other words, the power exists until Congress has acted, to
incidentally regulate by health and quarantine laws, even although interstate
and foreign commerce is affected, and the power to absolutely prohibit
additionally obtains where the thing prohibited is not commerce, and hence not
embraced in either interstate or foreign commerce. True, also, it was held in
some of the cases referred to by counsel, that where the introduction of a
given article was absolutely prohibited by a state law upon the asserted
theory that the health of the inhabitants would be aided by the enforcement of
the prohibition, it was decided that, as the article which it was thus sought
to prohibit was a well-known article of commerce, and therefore the legitimate
subject of interstate commerce, it could not be removed from that category by
the prohibitive effect of state legislation. But this case does not involve
that question, since it does not present the attempted exercise by the state
of the power to absolutely prohibit the introduction of an article of
commerce, but merely requires us to decide whether a state law, which
regulates the introduction of persons and property into a district infested
with contagious or infections diseases, is void, because to enforce such
regulation will burden interstate and foreign commerce, and therefore violate
the Constitution of the United States. It is earnestly insisted that the
statute, whose constitutionality is assailed, is, on its face, not a
regulation, but an absolute prohibition against interstate commerce, and it is
sought to sustain this contention by various suggestions as to the wrong which
may possibly arise from a perversion and an abuse by the state authorities of
the power which the statute confers. Thus it is said, what is an infectious
and contagious disease is uncertain, and involves a large number of maladies.
How many cases of such malady are essential to cause a place to be considered
as infected with them is left to the determination of the board of health.
That board, it is argued, may then arbitrarily, upon the existence of one or
more cases of any malady which it may deem to be infectious or contagious,
declare any given place in the state, or even the whole state of Louisiana,
infected, and proceed to absolutely debar all interstate or foreign commerce
with the state of Louisiana. True it is, as said in _Morgan's L. & T. R. & S.
S. Co._ v. _Louisiana Bd. of Health_ , 118 U. S. 455, 30 L. ed. 237, 6 Sup.
Ct. Rep. 1114:

30

'In all cases of this kind it has been repeatedly held that, when the question
is raised whether the state statute is a just exercise of state power or is
intended by roundabout means to invade the domain of Federal authority, this
court will look into the operation and effect of the statute to discern its
purpose. See _Henderson_ v. _New York_ , 92 U. S. 259, 23 L. ed. 543; _Chy
Lung_ v. _Freeman_ , 92 U. S. 275, 23 L. ed. 550; _Cannon_ v. _New Orleans_ ,
20 Wall. 577, 22 L. ed. 417.'

31

But this implies that we are to consider the statute as enacted and the
natural results flowing from it. It does not import that we are to hold a
state statute unconstitutional by indulging in conjecture as to every
conceivable harm which may arise or wrong which may be occasioned by the abuse
of the lawful powers which a statute confers. It will be time enough to
consider a case of such supposed abuse when it is presented for consideration.
And it is also to be borne in mind, as said by this court in _Louisiana_ v.
_Texas_ , 176 U. S. 1, 22, 44 L. ed. 347, 355, 20 Sup. Ct. Rep. 251, 258, if
any such wrong should be perpetrated 'Congress could by affirmative action
displace the local laws, substitute laws of its own, and thus correct any
unjustifiable and oppressive exercise of power by state legislation.' And the
views which we have previously expressed suffice to dispose of the contention
that the subjecting of the vessel of the plaintiff in error to the restriction
imposed by the quarantine and health law of the state operated to deprive the
defendant in error of its property without due process of law, in violation of
the 14th Amendment. It having been ascertained that the regulation was
lawfully adopted and enforced, the contention demonstrates its own
unsoundness, since in the last analysis it reduces itself to the proposition
that the effect of the 14th Amendment was to strip the government, whether
state or national, of all power to enact regulations protecting the health and
safety of the people, or, what is equivalent thereto, necessarily amounts to
saying that such laws when lawfully enacted cannot be enforced against person
or property without violating the Constitution. In other words, that the
lawful powers of government which the Constitution has conferred may not be
exerted without bringing about a violation of the Constitution.

32

'Third. The statute as applied and construed is void, for the reason that it
is in conflict with treaties between the United States on the one part and the
Republic of France and the Kingdom of Italy on the other part, guaranteeing
certain rights, privileges, and immunities to the citizens and subjects of
said countries.'

33

Reliance is placed, to sustain this proposition, on the provisions of a treaty
concluded with the Kingdom of Italy on February 26, 1871; on the terms of a
treaty with Great Britain of July 3, 1815, as also a treaty between the United
States and the Kingdom of Greece, concluded December 22, 1837, and one
concluded with the Kingdom of Sweden and Norway on July 4, 1827. The treaties
of other countries than Italy are referred to upon the theory that as by the
treaty concluded with France on April 30, 1803, by which Louisiana was
acquired, it was provided that France should be treated upon the footing of
the most favored nation in the ports of the ceded territory, therefore the
treaties in question made with other countries than France were applicable to
the plaintiff in error, a French subject.

34

Conceding, _arguendo_ , this latter proposition, and therefore assuming that
all the treaties relied on are applicable, we think it clearly results from
their context that they were not intended to, and did not, deprive the
government of the United States of those powers necessarily inhering in it and
essential to the health and safety of its people. We say the United States,
because if the treaties relied on have the effect claimed for them that effect
would be equally as operative and conclusive against a quarantine established
by the government of the United States as it would be against a state
quarantine operating upon and affecting foreign commerce by virtue of the
inaction of Congress. Without reviewing the text of all the treaties, we
advert to the provisions of the one made with Greece, which is principally
relied upon. The text of article 15 of this treaty is the provision to which
out attention is directed, and it is reproduced in the margin.

35

'Article 15. It is agreed that vessels arriving directly from the United
States of America at a port within the dominions of His Majesty the King of
Greece, or from the Kingdom of Greece, at a port of the United States of
America, and provided with a bill of health granted by an officer having
competent power to that effect at the port whence such vessel shall have
salled, setting forth that no malignant or contagious diseases prevailed in
that port, shall be subjected to no other quarantine than such as may be
necessary for the visit of the health officer of the port where such vessel
shall have arrived, after which said vessels shall be allowed immediately to
enter and unload their cargoes; Provided always, that there shall be on board
no person who, during the voyage, shall have been attacked with any malignant
or contagious disease; that such vessels shall not, during the passage, have
communicated with any vessel liable itself to undergo a quarantine; and that
the country whence they came shall not at that time be so far infected or
suspected that, before their arrival, an ordinance had been issued in
consequence of which all vessels coming from that country should be considered
as suspected, and consequently subject to quarantine.' [8 Stat. at. L. 506.]

36

It is apparent that it provides only the particular form of document which
shall be taken by a ship of the Kingdom of Greece and reciprocally by those of
the United States for the purpose of establishing that infectious or
contagious diseases did not exist at the point of departure. But it is plain
from the face of the treaty that the provision as to the certificate was not
intended to abrogate the quarantine power, since the concluding section of the
article in question expressly subjects the vessel holding the certificate to
quarantine detention if, on its arrival, a general quarantine had been
established against all ships coming from the port whence the vessel holding
the certificate had sailed. In other words, the treaty having provided the
certificate and given it effect under ordinary conditions, proceeds to subject
the vessel holding the certificate to quarantine, if, on its arrival, such
restriction had been established in consequence of infection deemed to exist
at the port of departure. Nothing in the text of the treaty, we think, gives
even color to the suggestion that it was intended to deal with the exercise by
the government of the United States of its power to legislate for the safety
and health of its people or to render the exertion of such power nugatory by
exempting the vessels of the Kingdom of Greece, when coming to the United
States, from the operation of such laws. In other words, the treaty was made
subject to the enactment of such health laws as the local conditions might
evoke not paramount to them. Especially where the restriction imposed upon the
vessel is based, not upon the conditions existing at the port of departure,
but upon the presence of an infectious or contagious malady at the port of
arrival within the United States, which, in the nature of things, could not be
covered by the certificate relating to the state of the public health at the
port whence the ship had sailed.

37

'Fourth. The statute as applied is void for the reason that it is in conflict
with the laws of the United States relating to foreign immigration into the
United States.'

38

In the argument at bar this proposition embraces also the claim that the
statute is void because in conflict with the act of Congress of 1893 entitled
'An Act Granting Additional Quarantine Powers and Imposing Additional Duties
upon the Marine Hospital Service.' 27 Stat. at L. 449, chap. 114. And that it
also is in conflict with the rules and regulations adopted for the enforcement
of both the immigration laws and the quarantine law referred to.

39

The immigration acts to which the proposition relates are those of March 3,
1875, of August 3, 1882, of June 26, 1884, of February 26, 1885, of February
23, 1887, and March 3, 1891, and the regulations to enforce the same. Without
undertaking to analyze the provisions of these acts, it suffices to say that,
after scrutinizing them, we think they do not purport to abrogate the
quarantine laws of the several states, and that the safeguards which they
create and the regulations which they impose on the introduction of immigrants
are ancillary, and subject to such quarantine laws. So far as the act of 1893
is concerned, it is manifest that it did not contemplate the overthrow of the
existing state quarantine systems and the abrogation of the powers on the
subject of health and quarantine exercised by the states from the beginning,
because the enactment of state laws on these subjects would, in particular
instances, affect interstate and foreign commerce. An extract from ยง 3 of the
act, which we think makes these conclusions obvious, is reproduced in the
margin.

40

'Sec. 3. That the Supervising Surgeon General of the Marine Hospital Service
shall, immediately after this act takes effect, examine the quarantine
regulations of all state and municipal boards of health, and shall, under the
direction of the Secretary of the Treasury, cooperate with and aid state and
municipal boards of health in the execution and enforcement of the rules and
regulations of such boards and in the execution and enforcement of the rules
and regulations made by the Secretary of the Treasury, to prevent the
introduction of contagious or infectious diseases into the United States from
foreign countries, and into one state or territory or the District of Columbia
from another state or territory or the District of Columbia; and all rules and
regulations made by the Secretary of the Treasury shall operate uniformly and
in no manner discriminate against any port or place; and at such ports and
places within the United States as have no quarantine regulations under state
or municipal authority, where such regulations are, in the opinion of the
Secretary of the Treasury, necessary to prevent the introduction of contagious
or infectious diseases into the United States from foreign countries, or into
one state or territory or the District of Columbia from another state or
territory or the District of Columbia, and at such ports and places within the
United States where Nor do we find anything in the rules and regulations
adopted by the Secretary of the Treasury in execution of the power conferred
upon him by the act in question giving support to the contention based upon
them. It follows from what has been said that the Supreme Court of Louisiana
did not err in deciding that the act in question was not repugnant to the
Constitution of the United States, and was not in conflict with the acts of
Congress or the treaties made by the United States which were relied upon to
show to the contrary and _its judgment is therefore affirmed_.

41

Mr. Justice Brown, with whom was Mr. Justice Harlan, dissenting:

42

The power of the several states, in the absence of legislation by Congress on
the subject, to establish quarantine regulations, to prohibit the introduction
into the state of persons infected with disease, or recently exposed to
contagion, and to impose a reasonable charge upon vessels subjected to
examination at quarantine stations, is so well settled by repeated decisions
of this court as to be no longer open to doubt. This case, however, does not
involve that question, but the broader one, whether, in the assumed exercise
of this power, the legislature may declare certain portions of the state to be
in quarantine, and prohibit the entry therein of _all_ persons whatsoever,
whether coming from the United States or foreign countries, from infected or
uninfected ports, whether the persons included are diseased or have recently
been exposed to contagion, or are perfectly sound and healthy, and coming from
ports in which there is no suspicion of contagious diseases.

43

I have no doubt of the power to quarantine all vessels arriving in the
Mississippi from foreign ports for a sufficient length of time to enable the
health officers to determine whether there are among her passengers any
persons afflicted with a contagious disease. But the state of Louisiana
undertakes to do far more than this. It authorizes the state board of health,
at its discretion, to 'prohibit the introduction into any infected portion of
the state of persons acclimated, unacclimated, or said to be immune, when in
its judgment the introduction of said persons would add to or increase the
prevalence of the disease;' and at its meeting on September 29, 1898, the
board of health adopted the following resolution:

44

'That hereafter, in the case of any town, city, or parish of Louisiana being
declared in quarantine, no body or bodies of people, immigrants, soldiers, or
others shall be allowed to enter said town, city, or parish so long as said
quarantine shall exist, and that the president of the board shall enforce this
resolution.'

45

In other words, the board of health is authorized and assumes to prohibit in
all portions of the state which it chooses to declare in quarantine, the
introduction or immigration of all persons from outside the quarantine
district, whether infected or uninfected, sick or will, sound or unsound,
feeble or healthy; and that, too, not for the few days necessary to establish
the sanitary status of such persons, but for an indefinite and possibly
permanent period. I think this is not a necessary or proper exercise of the
police power, and falls within that numerous class of cases which hold that
states may not, in the assumed exercise of police power, interfere with
foreign or interstate commerce.

46

The only excuse offered for such a wholesale exclusion of immigrants is, as
stated by the supreme court, 'to keep down, as far as possible, the number of
persons to be brought within danger of contagion or infection, and by means of
this reduction to accomplish the subsidence and suppression of the disease,
and the spread of the same.' In other words, the excuse amounts to this: that
the admission, even of healthy persons, adds to the possibility of the
contagion being communicated upon the principle of adding fuel to the flame.
It does not increase the danger of contagion by adding infected persons to the
population, since the bill avers that all the immigrants were healthy and
sound. All it could possibly do is to increase the number of persons who might
become ill if permitted to be added to the population. This is a danger, not
to the population, but to the immigrants. It seems to me that this is a
possibility too remote to justify the drastic measure of a total exclusion of
all classes of immigrants, and that the opinion of the court is directly in
the teeth of _Hannibal & St. J. R. Co._ v. _Husen_ , 95 U. S. 465, 24 L. ed.
527, wherein a state statute, which prohibited the driving or conveying of any
Texas, Mexican, or Indian cattle into the state, between March 1 and November
1 in each year, was held to be in conflict with the commerce clause of the
Constitution. Such statute was declared to be more than a quarantine
regulation, and not a legitimate exercise of the police power of the state.
Said Mr. Justice Strong (p. 472, L. ed. 530): 'While we unhesitatingly admit
that a state may pass sanitary laws, and laws for the protection of life,
liberty, health, or property within its borders; while it may prevent persons
and animals suffering under contagious or infectious diseases, or convicts,
etc., from entering the state; while, for the purpose of self-protection, it
may establish quarantine and reasonable inspection laws,--it may not interfere
with the transportation into or through the state, beyond what is absolutely
necessary for its self-protection. It may not, under the cover of exerting its
police powers, substantially prohibit or burden either foreign or interstate
commerce.' The statute was held to be a plain intrusion upon the exclusive
domain of Congress; that it was not a quarantine law; not an inspection law,
and was objectionable because it prohibited the introduction of cattle, no
matter whether they may do an injury to the inhabitants of a state or not;
'and if you do bring them in, even for the purpose of carrying them through
the state without unloading them, you shall be subject to extraordinary
liabilities.' Cases covering the same principle are those of _State_ v. _The
Constitution_ , 42 Cal. 578, 10 Am. Rep. 303, and _Bangor_ v. _Smith_ , 83 Me.
422, 13 L. R. A. 686, 22 Atl. 379.

47

I am also unable to concur in the construction given in the opinion of the
court to the treaty stipulation with France and other foreign powers. The
treaty with France of 1803 provides that 'the ships of France shall be treated
upon the footing of the most favored nations in the ports above mentioned' of
Louisiana. Article 15 of the treaty with Greece of December 22, 1837, set
forth in the opinion, provides that vessels arriving directly from the Kingdom
of Greece at any port of the United States of America, 'and provided with a
bill of health granted by an officer having competent power to that effect at
the port whence such vessel shall have sailed, setting forth that no malignant
or contagious diseases prevailed in that port, shall be subjected to no other
quarantine than such as may be necessary for the visit of the health officer
of the port where such vessels shall have arrived, after which said vessels
shall be allowed immediately to enter and unload their cargoes: _Provided
always_ , That there shall be on board no person who, during the voyage, shall
have been attacked with any malignant or contagious diseases; that such
vessels shall not, during their passage, have communicated with any vessel
liable itself to undergo a quarantine; and that the country whence they came
shall not at that time be so far infected or suspected that, before their
arrival, an ordinance had been issued in consequence of which all vessels
coming from that country should be considered as suspected, and consequently
subject to quarantine.' If the law in question in Louisiana, excluding French
ships from all access to the port of New Orleans, be not a violation of the
provision of the treaty that vessels 'shall be subjected to no other
quarantine than such as may be necessary for the visit of the health officer
of the port where such vessels shall have arrived, after which said vessels
shall be allowed immediately to enter and unload their cargoes,' I am unable
to conceive a state of facts which would constitute a violation of that
provision. Necessary as efficient quarantine laws are, I know of no authority
in the states to enact such as are in conflict with our treaties with foreign
nations.

quarantine regulations exist under the authority of the state or municipality
which, in the opinion of the Secretary of the Treasury, are not sufficient to
prevent the introduction of such diseases into the United States, or into one
state or territory or the District of Columbia from another state or territory
or the District of Columbia, the Secretary of the Treasury shall, if in his
judgment it is necessary and proper, make such additional rules and
regulations as are necessary to prevent the introduction of such diseases into
the United States from foreign countries, or into one state or territory or
the District of Columbia from another state or territory or the District of
Columbia, and when said rules and regulations have been made they shall be
promulgated by the Secretary of the Treasury and enforced by the sanitary
authorities of the states and municipalities, where the state or municipal
health authorities will undertake to execute and enforce them; but if the
state or municipal authorities shall fail or refuse to enforce said rules and
regulations the President shall execute and enforce the same and adopt such
measures as in his judgment shall be necessary to prevent the introduction or
spread of such diseases, and may detail or appoint officers for that purpose.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall make such rules and regulations as are
necessary to be observed by vessels at the port of departure and on the
voyage, where such vessels sail from any foreign port or place to any port or
place in the United States, to secure the best sanitary condition of such
vessel, her cargo, passengers, and crew, which shall be published and
communicated to and enforced by the consular officers of the United States.'

