22 U.S. 1

6 L.Ed. 23

9 Wheat. 1

GIBBONS, _Appellant_ ,  
v.  
OGDEN, _Respondent_.

March 2, 1824

1

The acts of the Legislature of the State of New-York, granting to Robert R.
Livingston and Robert Fulton the exclusive navigation of all the waters within
the jurisdiction of that State, with boats moved by fire or steam, for a term
of years, are repugnant to that clause of the constitution of the United
States, which authorizes Congress to regulate commerce, so far as the said
acts prohibit vessels licensed, according to the laws of the United States,
for carrying on the coasting trade, from navigating the said waters by means
of fire or steam.

2

APPEAL from the Court for the Trial of Impeachments and Correction of Errors
of the State of New-York. Aaron Ogden filed his bill in the Court of Chancery
of that State, against Thomas Gibbons, setting forth the several acts of the
Legislature thereof, enacted for the purpose of securing to Robert R.
Livingston and Robert Fulton, the exclusive navigation of all the waters
within the jurisdiction of that State, with boats moved by fire or steam, for
a term of years which has not yet expired; and authorizing the Chancellor to
award an injunction, restraining any person whatever from navigating those
waters with boats of that description. The bill stated an assignment from
Livingston and Fulton to one John R. Livingston, and from him to the
complainant, Ogden, of the right to navigate the waters between Elizabethtown,
and other places in New-Jersey, and the city of New-York; and that Gibbons,
the defendant below, was in possession of two steam boats, called the
Stoudinger and the Bellona, which were actually employed in running between
New-York and Elizabethtown, in violation of the exclusive privilege conferred
on the complainant, and praying an injunction to restrain the said Gibbons
from using the said boats, or any other propelled by fire or steam, in
navigating the waters within the territory of New-York. The injunction having
been awarded, the answer of Gibbons was filed; in which he stated, that the
boats employed by him were duly enrolled and licensed, to be employed in
carrying on the coasting trade, under the act of Congress, passed the 18th of
February, 1793, c. 3. entitled, 'An act for enrolling and licensing ships and
vessels to be employed in the coasting trade and fisheries, and for regulating
the same.' And the defendant insisted on his right, in virtue of such
licenses, to navigate the waters between Elizabethtown and the city of New-
York, the said acts of the Legislature of the State of New-York to the
contrary notwithstanding. At the hearing, the Chancellor perpetuated the
injunction, being of the opinion, that the said acts were not repugnant to the
constitution and laws of the United States, and were valid. This decree was
affirmed in the Court for the Trial of Impeachments and Correction of Errors,
which is the highest Court of law and equity in the State, before which the
cause could be carried, and it was thereupon brought to this Court by appeal.

3

Principles of interpretation.

4

The power of regulating commerce extends to the regulation of _navigation_.

5

The power to regulate commerce extends to every species of commercial
intercourse between the United States and foreiga nations, and among the
several States. It dees not stop at the external boundary of a State.

6

But it does not extend to a commerce which is completely internal.

7

The power to regulate commerce is general, and has no limitations but such as
are prescribed in the constitution itself.

8

The power to regulate commerce, so far as it extends, is exclusively vested in
Congress, and no part of it can be exercised by a State.

9

State inspection laws, health laws, and laws for regulating the internal
commerce of a State, and those which respect turnpike roads, ferries, &c. are
not within the power granted to Congress.

10

The laws of N. Y. granting to R.R.L. and R. F. the exclusive right of
navigating the waters of that State with steam boarts, are in collision with
the acts of Congress regulating the coasting trade, which being made in
pursuance of the constitution, are supreme, and the State laws must yield to
that supremacy, even though enacted in pursuance of powers acknowledged to
remain in the States.

11

A license under the acts of Congress for regulating the coasting trade, gives
a permission to carry on that trade.

12

The license is not merely intended to confer the national character.

13

The power of regulating commerce extends to navigation carried on by vessels
exclusively employed in transporting passengers.

14

The power of regulating commerce extends to vessels propelled by steam or
fire, as well as to those navigated by the instrument ality of wind and sails.

15

_Feb._ 4 _th_ , 5 _th, and_ 6 _th._

16

Mr. _Webster_ , for the appellant, admitted, that there was a very respectable
weight of authority in favour of the decision, which was sought to be
reversed. The laws in question, he knew, had been deliberately re-enacted by
the Legislature of New-York; and they had also received the sanction, at
different times, of all her judicial tribunals, than which there were few, if
any, in the country, more justly entitled to respect and deference. The
disposition of the Court would be, undoubtedly, to support, if it could, laws
so passed and so sanctioned. He admitted, therefore, that it was justly
expected of him that he should make out a clear case; and unless he did so, he
did not hope for a reversal. It should be remembered, however, that the whole
of this branch of power, as exercised by this Court, was a power of revision.
The question must be decided by the State Courts, and decided in a particular
manner, before it could be brought here at all. Such decisions alone gave the
Court jurisdiction; and therefore, while they are to be respected as the
judgments of learned Judges, they are yet in the condition of all decisions
from which the law allows an appeal.

17

It would not be a waste of time to advert to the existing state of the _facts_
connected with the subject of this litigation. The use of steam boats, on the
coasts, and in the bays and rivers of the country, had become very general.
The intercourse of its different parts essentially depended upon this mode of
conveyance and transportation. Rivers and bays, in many cases, form the
divisions between States; and thence it was obvious, that if the States should
make regulations for the navigation of these waters, and such regulations
should be repugnant and hostile, embarrassment would necessarily happen to the
general intercourse of the community. Such events had actually occurred, and
had created the existing state of things.

18

By the law of New-York, no one can navigate the bay of New-York, the North
River, the Sound, the lakes, or any of the waters of that State, by steam
vessels, _without a license from the grantees of New-York_ , under penalty of
forfeiture of the vessel.

19

By the law of the neighbouring State of Connecticut, no one can enter her
waters with a steam vessel _having such license_.

20

By the law of New-Jersey, if any citizen of that State shall be _restrained_ ,
under the New-York law, from using steam boats between the ancient shores of
New-Jersey and New-York, he shall be entitled to an action for damages, _in_
_New-Jersey_ , with treble costs against the party who thus restrains or
impedes him _under the law of New-York!_ This act of New-Jersey is called an
act of _retortion_ against the illegal and oppressive legislation of New-York;
and seems to be defended on those grounds of public law which justify
_reprisals_ between independent States.

21

It would hardly be contended, that _all_ these acts were consistent with the
laws and constitution of the United States. If there were no power in the
general government, to control this extreme belligerent legislation of the
States, the powers of the government were essentially deficient, in a most
important and interesting particular. The present controversy respected the
earliest of these State laws, those of New-York. On those, this Court was now
to pronounce; and if they should be declared to be valid and operative, he
hoped somebody would point out _where_ the State right stopped, and on what
grounds the acts of other States were to be held inoperative and void.

22

It would be necessary to advert more particularly to the laws of New-York, as
they were stated in the record. The first was passed March 19th, 1787. By this
act, a sale and exclusive right was granted to _John Fitch_ , of making and
using every kind of boat or vessel impelled by steam, in all creeks, rivers,
bays, and waters, within the territory and jurisdiction of New-York, for
fourteen years.

23

On the 27th of March, 1798, an act was passed, on the suggestion that Fitch
was dead, or had withdrawn from the State, without having made any attempt to
use his privilege, repealing the grant to him, and conferring similar
privileges on _Robert R. Liringston_ , for the term of twenty years, on a
suggestion, made by him, _that he was possessor of a mode of applying the
steam engine to propel a boat, on new and advantageous principles_. On the 5th
of April, 1803, another act was passed, by which it was declared, that the
rights and privileges granted to _R. R. Livingston_ , by the last act, should
be extended to him and _Robert Fulton, for twenty years, from the passing of
this act_. Then there is the act of April 11, 1808 purporting to extend the
monopoly, in point of time, five years for every additional boat, the whole
duration, however, not to exceed thirty years; and forbidding any and all
persons to navigate the waters of the State, with any steam boat or 11, 1808,
purporting of _Livingston and Fulton_ , under penalty of forfeiture of the
boat or vessel. And, lastly, comes the act of April 9, 1811, for enforcing the
provisions of the last mentioned act, and declaring, that the forfeiture of
the boat or vessel, found navigating against the provisions of the previous
acts, shall be deemed to accrue on the day on which such boat or vessel should
navigate the waters of the State; and that _Livingston and Fulton_ might
immediately have an action for such boat or vessel, in like manner as if they
themselves had been dispossessed thereof by force; and that on bringing any
such suit, the defendant therein should be prohibited, by injunction, from
removing the boat or vessel out of the State, or using it within the State.
There were one or two other acts mentioned in the pleadings, which principally
respected the time allowed for complying with the condition of the grant, and
were not material to the discussion of the case.

24

By these acts, then, an exclusive right is given to _Livingston and Fulton_ ,
to use _steam navigation_ on all the waters of New-York, for thirty years from
1808.

25

It is not necessary to recite the several conveyances and agreements, stated
in the record, by which _Ogden_ , the plaintiff below, derives title under
_Livingston and Fulton_ , to the exclusive use of part of these waters.

26

The appellant being owner of a steam-boat, and being found navigating the
waters between New-Jersey and the city of New-York, over which waters _Ogden_
, the plaintiff below, claimed an exclusive right, under _Livingston and
Fulton_ , this bill was filed against him by _Ogden_ , in October, 1818, and
an injunction granted, restraining him from such use of his boat. This
injunction was made perpetual, on the final hearing of the cause, in the Court
of Chancery; and the decree of the Chancellor has been duly affirmed in the
Court of Errors. The right, therefore, which the plaintiff below asserts to
have and maintain his injunction, depends obviously on the general validity of
the New-York laws, and, especially, on their force and operation as against
the right set up by the defendant. This right he states, in his answer, to be,
that he is a citizen of New-Jersey, and owner of the steam-boat in question;
that the boat was a _vessel_ of more than twenty tons burden, _duly enrolled
and licensed for carrying on the coasting trade_ , and intended to be employed
by him, in that trade, between Elizabethtown, in New-Jersey, and the city of
New-York; and was actually employed in navigating between those places, at the
time of, and until notice of the injunction from the Court of Chancery was
served on him.

27

On these pleadings the substantial question is raised: Are these laws such as
the Legislature of New-York had a right to pass? If so, do they, secondly, in
their operation, interfere with any right enjoyed under the constitution and
laws of the United States, and are they, therefore, void, as far as such
interference extends?

28

It may be well to state again their general purport and effect, and the
purport and effect of the other State laws, which have been enacted by way of
retaliation.

29

A steam vessel, of any description, going to New-York, is forefeited to the
representatives of _Livingston and Fulton, unless she have their license_.

30

Going from New-York, or elsewhere, to Connecticut, she is prohibited from
entering the waters of the State, _if she have such license_.

31

If the representatives of _Livingston and Fulton, in New-York_ , carry into
effect, by judicial process, the provision of the New-York laws, against any
citizen of New-Jersey, they expose themselves to a statute action, _in New-
Jersey_ , for all damages, and treble costs.

32

The New-York laws extend to all steam vessels; to steam frigates, steam ferry-
boats, and all intermediate classes.

33

They extend to public as well as private ships; and to vessels employed in
foreign commerce, as well as to those employed in the coasting trade.

34

The remedy is as summary as the grant itself is ample; for immediate
confiscation, without seizure, trial, or judgment, is the penalty of
infringement.

35

In regard to these acts, he should contend, in the first place, that they
exceeded the power of the Legislature; and, secondly, that if they could be
considered valid, for any purpose, they were void, still, as against any right
enjoyed under the laws of the United States, with which they came in
collision; and that, in this case, they were found interfering with such
rights.

36

He should contend, that the power of Congress to regulate commerce, was
complete and entire, and, to a certain extent, necessarily exclusive; that the
acts in question were regulations of commerce, in a most important particular;
and affecting it in those respects, in which it was under the exclusive
authority of Congress. He stated this first proposition guardedly. He did not
mean to say that _all_ regulations which might, in their operation, affect
commerce, were exclusively in the power of Congress; but that _suck power_ as
had been exercised in this case, did not remain with the States. Nothing was
more complex than commerce; and in such an age as this, no words embraced a
wider field than _commercial regulation_. Almost all the business and
intercourse of life may be connected, incidentally, more or less, with
_commercial regulations_. But it was only necessary to apply to this part of
the constitution the well settled rules of construction. Some powers are
holden to be exclusive in Congress, from the use of exclusive words in the
grant; others, from the prohibitions on the States to exercise similar powers;
and others, again, from the nature of the powers themselves. It has been by
this mode of reasoning that the Court has adjudicated on many important
questions; and the same mode is proper here. And, as some powers have been
holden exclusive, and others not so, under the same form of expression, from
the nature of the different powers respectively; so, where the power, on any
one subject, is given in general words, like the power to regulate commerce,
the true method of construction would be, to consider of what parts the grant
is composed, and which of those, from the nature of the thing, ought to be
considered exclusive. The right set up in this case, under the laws of New-
York, is a _monopoly_. Now, he thought it very reasonable to say, that the
constitution never intended to leave with the States the power of granting
monopolies, either of trade or of navigation; and, therefore, that as to this,
the commercial power was exclusive in Congress.

37

It was in vain to look for a precise and exact _definition_ of the powers of
Congress, on several subjects. The constitution did not undertake the task of
making such exact definitions. In confering powers, it proceeded in the way of
_enumeration_ , stating the powers conferred, one after another, in few words;
and, where the power was general, or complex in its nature, the extent of the
grant must necessarily be judged of, and limited, by its object, and by the
nature of the power.

38

Few things were better known, than the immediate causes which led to the
adoption of the present constitution; and he thought nothing clearer, than
that the prevailing motive was _to regulate commerce;_ to rescue it from the
embarrassing and destructive consequences, resulting from the legislation of
so many different States, and to place it under the protection of a uniform
law. The great objects were commerce and revenue; and they were objects
indissolubly connected. By the confederation, divers restrictions had been
imposed on the States; but these had not been found sufficient. No State, it
was true, could send or receive an embassy; nor make any treaty; nor enter
into any compact with another State, or with a foreign power; nor lay duties,
interfering with treaties which had been entered into by Congress. But all
these were found to be far short of what the actual condition of the country
regulate The States could still, each for itself, regulate commerce, and the
consequence was, a perpetual jarring and hostility of commercial regulation.

39

In the history of the times, it was accordingly found, that the great topic,
urged on all occasions, as showing the necessity of a new and different
government, was the state of trade and commerce. To. benefit and improve
these, was a great object in itself: and it became greater when it was
regarded as the only means of enabling the country to pay the public debt, and
to do justice to those who had most effectually laboured for its independence.
The leading state papers of the time are full of this topic. The New-Jersey
resolutions1 complain, that the regulation of trade was in the power of the
several States, within their separate jurisdiction, in such a degree as to
involve many difficulties and embarrassments; and they express an earnest
opinion, that _the sole and exclusive power_ of regulating trade with foreign
States, ought to be in Congress. Mr. Witherspoon's motion in Congress, in
1781, is of the same general character; and the report of a committee of that
body, in 1785, is still more emphatic. It declares that Congress ought to
possess the _sole and exclusive_ power of regulating trade, as well with
foreign nations, as between the States.2 The resolutions of Virginia, in
January, 1786, which were the immediate cause of the convention, put forth
this same great object. Indeed, it is the _only_ object stated in those
resolutions. There is not another idea in the whole document. The entire
purpose for which the delegates assembled at Annapolis, was to devise means
for the uniform regulation of trade. They found no means, but in a general
government; and they recommended a convention to accomplish that purpose. Over
whatever other interests of the country this government may diffuse its
benefits, and its blessings, it will always be true, as matter of historical
fact, that it had its immediate origin in the necessities of commerce; and,
for its immediate object, the relief of those necessities, by removing their
causes, and by establishing a _uniform_ and steady system. It would be easy to
show, by reference to the discussions in the several State conventions, the
prevalence of the same general topics; and if any one would look to the
proceedings of several of the States, especially to those of Massachusetts and
New-York, he would see, very plainly, by the recorded lists of votes, that
wherever this commercial necessity was most strongly felt, there the proposed
new constitution had most friends. In the New-York convention, the argument
arising from this consideration was strongly pressed, by the distinguished
person whose name is connected with the present question.

40

We do not find, in the history of the formation and adoption of the
constitution, that any man speaks of a general _concurrent power_ , in the
regulation of foreign and domestic trade, as still residing in the States. The
very object intended, more than any other, was to take away such power. If it
had not so provided, the constitution would not have been worth accepting.

41

He contended, therefore, that the people intended, in establishing the
constitution, to transfer, from the several States to a general government,
those high and important powers over commerce, which, in their exercise, were
to maintain an uniform and general system. From the very nature of the case,
these powers must be _exclusive;_ that is, the higher branches of commercial
regulation must be exclusively committed to a single hand. What is it that is
to be regulated? Not the commerce of the several States, respectively, but the
commerce of the United States. Henceforth, the commerce of the States was to
be an _unit;_ and the system by which it was to exist and be governed, must
necessarily be complete, entire, and uniform. Its character was to be
described in the flag which waved over it, EPLURIBUS UNUM. Now, how could
individual States assert a right of concurrent legislation, in a case of this
sort, without manifest encroachment and confusion? It should be repeated, that
the words used in the constitution, 'to regulate commerce,' are so very
general and extensive, that they might be construed to cover a vast field of
legislation, part of which has always been occupied by State laws; and,
therefore, the words must have a reasonable construction, and the power should
be considered as exclusively vested in Congress, so far, and so far only, as
the nature of the power requires. And he insisted, that the nature of the
case, and of the power, did imperiously require, that such important authority
as that of granting monopolies of trade and navigation, should not be
considered as still retained by the States.

42

It is apparent, from the prohibitions on the power of the States, that the
_general_ concurrent power was not supposed to be left with them. And the
exception, out of these prohibitions, of the _inspection laws_ , proves this
still more clearly. Which most concerns the commerce of this country, that
New-York and Virginia should have an uncontrolled power to establish their
inspection for flour and tobacco, or that they should have an uncontrolled
power of granting either a monopoly of trade in their own ports, or a monopoly
of navigation over all the waters leading to those ports? Yet, the argument on
the other side must be, that, although the constitution has sedulously guarded
and limited the first of these powers, it has left the last wholly unlimited
and uncontrolled.

43

But, although much had been said, in the discussion on former occasions, about
this supposed _concurrent_ power in the States, he found great difficulty in
understanding what was meant by it. It was generally qualified, by saying,
that it was a power, by which the States could pass laws on the subjects of
commercial regulation, which would be valid, until Congress should pass other
laws controlling them, or inconsistent with them, and that _then_ the State
laws must yield. What sort of _concurrent_ powers were these, which could not
exist together? Indeed, the very reading of the clause in the constitution
must put to flight this notion of a general concurrent power. The constitution
was formed for all the States; and Congress was to have power to regulate
commerce. Now, what is the import of this, but that Congress is to give the
rule to establish the system--to exercise the control over the subject? And,
can more than one power, in cases of this sort, give the rule, establish the
system, or exercise the control? As it is not contended that the power of
Congress is to be exercised by a _supervision_ of State legislation; and, as
it is clear, that Congress is to give the general rule, he contended, that
this power of giving the general rule was transferred, by the constitution,
from the States to Congress, to be exercised as that body might see fit. And,
consequently, that all those high exercises of power, which might be
considered as giving the rule, or establishing the system, in regard to great
commercial interests, were necessarily left with Congress alone. Of this
character he considered monopolies of trade or navigation; embargoes; the
system of navigation laws; the countervailing laws, as against foreign states;
and other important enactments respecting our connexion with such states. It
appeared to him a most reasonable construction, to say, that in these
respects, the power of Congress is exclusive, from the nature of the power. If
it be not so, where is the limit, or who shall fix a boundary for the exercise
of the power of the States? Can a State grant a monopoly of trade? Can New-
York shut her ports to all but her own citizens? Can she refuse admission to
ships of particular nations? The argument on the other side is, and must be,
that she might do all these things, until Congress should revoke her
enactments. And this is called _concurrent_ legislation. What confusion such
notions lead to, is obvious enough. A power in the States to do anything, and
every thing, in regard to commerce, till Congress shall undo it, would suppose
a state of of things, at least as bad as that which existed before the present
constitution. It is the true wisdom of these governments to keep their action
as distinct as possible. The general government should not seek to operate
where the States can operate with more advantage to the community; nor should
the States encroach on ground, which the public good, as well as the
constitution, refers to the exclusive control of Congress.

44

If the present state of things--these laws of New-York, the laws of
Connecticut, and the laws of New-Jersey, had been all presented, in the
convention of New-York, to the eminent person whose name is on this record,
and who acted, on that occasion, so important a part; if he had been told,
that, after all he had said in favour of the new government, and of its
salutary effects on commercial regulations, the time should yet come, when the
North River would be shut up by a monopoly from New York; the Sound
interdicted by a penal law of Connecticut; _reprisals_ authorized by New-
Jersey, against citizens of New-York; and when one could not cross a ferry,
without transhipment; does any one suppose he would have admitted all this, as
compatible with the government which he was recommending?

45

This doctrine of a _general_ concurrent power in the States, is insidious and
dangerous. If it be admitted, no one can say where it will stop. The States
may legislate, it is said, wherever Congress has not made a _plenary_ exercise
of its power. But who is to judge whether Congress has made this _plenary_
exercise of power? Congress has acted on this power; it has done all that it
deemed wise; and are the States now to do whatever Congress has left undone?
Congress makes such rules as, in its judgment, the case requires; and those
rules, whatever they are, constitute the _system_.

46

All useful regulation does not consist in restraint; and that which Congress
sees fit to leave free, is a part of its regulation, as much as the rest.

47

He thought the practice under the constitution sufficiently evinced, that this
portion of the commercial power was exclusive in Congress. When, before this
instance, have the States granted monopolies? When, until now, have they
interfered with the navigation of the country? The pilot laws, the health
laws, or quarantine laws; and various regulations of that class, which have
been recognised by Congress, are no arguments to prove, even if they are to be
called commercial regulations, (which they are not,) that other regulations,
more directly and strictly commercial, are not solely within the power of
Congress. There was a singular fallacy, as he humbly ventured to think, in the
argument of very learned and most respectable persons, on this subject. That
argument alleges, that the States have a concurrent power with Congress, of
regulating commerce; and its proof of this position is, that the States have,
without any question of their right, passed acts respecting turnpike roads,
toll bridges, and ferries. These are declared to be acts of commercial
regulation, affecting not only the interior commerce of the State itself, but
also commerce between different States. Therefore, as all these are
_commercial regulations_ , and are yet acknowledged to be rightfully
established by the States, it follows, as is supposed, that the States must
have a concurrent power to regulate commerce.

48

Now, what was the inevitable consequence of this mode of reasoning? Does it
not admit the power of Congress, at once, upon all these minor objects of
legislation? If all these be regulations of commerce, within the meaning of
the constitution, then, certainly, Congress having a concurrent power to
regulate commerce, may establish ferries, turnpikes, bridges, &c. and provide
for all this detail of interior legislation. To sustain the interference of
the State, in a high concern of maritime commerce, the argument adopts a
principle which acknowledges the right of Congress, over a vast scope of
internal legislation, which no one has heretofore supposed to be within its
powers. But this is not all; for it is admitted, that when Congress and the
States have power to legislate over the same subject, the power of Congress,
when exercised, controls or extinguishes the State power; and, therefore, the
consequence would seem to follow, from the argument, that all State
legislation, over such subjects as have been mentioned, is, at all times,
liable to the superior power of Congress; a consequence, which no one would
admit for a moment. The truth was, he thought, that all these things were, in
their general character, rather regulations of police than of commerce, in the
constitutional understanding of that term. A road, indeed, might be a matter
of great commercial concern. In many cases it is so; and when it is so, he
thought there was no doubt of the power of Congress to make it. But, generally
speaking, roads, and bridges, and ferries, though, of course, they affect
commerce and intercourse, do not obtain that importance and elevation, as to
be deemed _commercial regulations_. A reasonable construction must be given to
the constitution; and such construction is as necessary to the just power of
the States, as to the authority of Congress. Quarantine laws, for example, may
be considered as affecting commerce; yet they are, in their nature, _health
laws_. In England, we speak of the power of regulating commerce, as in
Parliament, or the King, as arbiter of commerce; yet the city of London enacts
health laws. Would any one infer from that circumstance, that the city of
London had concurrent power with Parliament or the Crown to _regulate
commerce?_ or, that it might grant a monopoly of the navigation of the Thames?
While a health law is reasonable, it is a health law; but if, under colour of
it, enactments should be made for other purposes, such enactments might be
void.

49

In the discussion in the New-York Courts, no small reliance was placed on the
law of that State Prohibiting the importation of slaves, as an example of a
commercial regulation, enacted by State authority. That law may or may not be
constitutional and valid. It has been referred to generally, but its
particular provisions have not been stated. When they are more clearly seen,
its character may be better determined.

50

It might further be argued, that the power of Congress over these high
branches of commerce was exclusive, from the consideration that Congress
possessed an exclusive admiralty jurisdiction. That it did possess such
exclusive jurisdiction, would hardly be contested. No State pretended to
exercise any jurisdiction of that kind. The States had abolished their Courts
of Admiralty, when the constitution went into operation. Over these waters,
therefore, or, at least, some of them, which are the subject of this monopoly,
New-York has no jurisdiction whatever. They are a part of the high sea, and
not within the body of any county. The authorities of that State could not
punish for a murder, committed on board one of these boats, in some places
within the range of this exclusive grant. This restraining of the States from
all jurisdiction, out of the bodies of their own counties, shows plainly
enough, that navigation on the high seas, was understood to be a matter to be
regulated only by Congress. It is not unreasonable to say, that what are
called the waters of New-York, are, to purposes of navigation and commercial
regulation, the waters of the United States. There is no cession, indeed, of
the waters themselves, but their _use_ , for those purposes, seemed to be
entrusted to the exclusive power of Congress. Several States have enacted
laws, which would appear to imply their conviction of the power of Congress,
over navigable waters, to a greater extent.

51

If there be a concurrent power of regulating commerce on the high seas, there
must be a concurrent admiralty jurisdiction, and a concurrent control of the
waters. It is a common principle, that arms of the sea, including navigable
rivers, belong to the sovereign, _so far as navigation is concerned_. Their
_use_ is navigation. The United States possess the general power over
navigation, and, of course, ought to control, in general, the use of navigable
waters. If it be admitted, that _for purposes of trade and navigation_ , the
North River, and its bay, are the river and bay of New-York, and the
Chesapeake the bay of Virginia, very great inconveniences and much confusion
might be the result.

52

It might now be well to take a nearer view of these laws, to see more exactly
what their provisions were, what consequences have followed from them, and
what would and might follow from other similar laws.

53

The first grant to _John Fitch_ , gave him the sole and exclusive right of
making, employing, and navigating, all boats impelled by fire or steam, ' _in
all creeks, rivers, bays, and waters, within the territory and jurisdiction of
the State_.' Any other person, navigating such boat, was to forfeit it, and to
pay a penalty of a hundred pounds. The subsequent acts repeal this, and grant
similar privileges to _Livingston and Fulton:_ and the act of 1811 provides
the extraordinary and summary _remedy_ , which has been already stated. The
river, the bay, and the marine league along the shore, are all within the
scope of this grant. Any vessel, therefore, of this description, coming into
any of those waters, without a license, whether from another State, or from
abroad, whether it be a public or private vessel, is instantly forfeited to
the grantees of the monopoly.

54

Now, it must be remembered, that this grant is made as an exercise of
_sovereign political power_. It is not an inspection law, nor a health law,
nor passed by any derivative authority; it is professedly an act of sovereign
power. Of course, there is no limit to the power, to be derived from the
_purpose_ for which it is exercised. If exercised for one purpose, it may be
also for another. No one can inquire into the _motives_ which influence
sovereign authority. It is enough, that such power manifests its will. The
motive alleged in this case is, to remunerate the grantees for a benefit
conferred by them on the public. But there is no necessary connexion between
that benefit and this mode of rewarding it; and if the State could grant this
monopoly for that purpose, it could also grant it for any other purpose. It
could make the grant for money; and so make the monopoly of navigation over
those waters a direct source of revenue. When this monopoly shall expire, in
1838, the State may continue it, for any pecuniary consideration which the
holders may see fit to offer, and the State to receive.

55

If the State may grant this monopoly, it may also grant another, for other
descriptions of vessels; for instance, for all _sloops_.

56

If it can grant these exclusive privileges to a few, it may grant them to
many; that is, it may grant them to all its own citizens, to the exclusion of
every body else.

57

But the waters of New-York are no more the subject of exclusive grants by that
State, than the waters of other States are subjects of such grants by those
other States. Virginia may well exercise, over the entrance of the Chesapeake,
all the power that New-York can exercise over the bay of New-York, and the
waters on the shore. The Chesapeake, therefore, upon the principle of these
laws, may be the subject of State monopoly; and so may the bay of
Massachusetts. But this is not all. It requires no greater power, to grant a
monopoly of _trade_ , than a monopoly of navigation. Of course, New-York, if
these acts can be maintained, may give an exclusive right of entry of vessels
into her ports. And the other States may do the same. These are not extreme
cases. We have only to suppose that other States should do what New-York has
already done, and that the power should be carried to its full extent.

58

To all this, there is no answer to be given except this, that the _concurrent_
power of the States, concurrent though it be, is yet _subordinate_ to the
legislation of Congress; and that, therefore, Congress may, when it pleases,
annul the State legislation; but, until it does so annul it, the State
legislation is valid and effectual. What is there to recommend a construction
which leads to a result like this? Here would be a perpetual hostility; one
Legislature enacting laws, till another Legislature should repeal them; one
sovereign power giving the rule, till another sovereign power should abrogate
it; and all this under the idea of _concurrent_ legislation!

59

But further; under this _concurrent power_ , the State does that which
Congress cannot do; that is, it gives preferences to the citizens of some
States over those of others. I do not mean here the advantages conferred by
the grant on the grantees; but the _disadvantages_ to which it subjects all
the other citizens of New-York. To impose an extraordinary tax on steam
navigation visiting the ports of New-York, and leaving it free every where
else, is giving a preference to the citizens of other States over those of
New-York. This Congress could not do; and yet the State does it: so that this
power, at first subordinate, then concurrent, now becomes paramount.

60

The people of New-York have a right to be protected against this monopoly. It
is one of the objects for which they agreed to this constitution, that they
should stand on an equality in commercial regulations; and if the government
should not insure them that, the promises made to them, in its behalf, would
not be performed.

61

He contended, therefore, in conclusion on this point, that the power of
Congress over these high branches of commercial regulation, was shown to be
exclusive, by considering what was wished and intended to be done, when the
convention, for forming the constitution, was called; by what was understood,
in the State conventions, to have been accomplished by the instrument; by the
prohibitions on the States, and the express exception relative to inspection
laws; by the nature of the power itself; by the terms used, as connected with
the nature of the power; by the subsequent understanding and practice, both of
Congress and the States; by the grant of exclusive admiralty jurisdiction to
the federal government; by the manifest danger of the opposite doctrine, and
the ruinous consequences to which it directly leads.

62

It required little now to be said, to prove that this exclusive grant is a law
regulating commerce; although, in some of the discussions elsewhere, it had
been called a law of _police_. If it be not a _regulation of commerce_ , then
it follows, against the constant admission on the other side, that Congress,
even by an express act, could not annul or control it. For if it be not a
regulation of commerce, Congress has no concern with it. But the granting of
monopolies of this kind is always referred to the power over commerce. It was
as arbiter of commerce that the King formerly granted such monopolies.3 This
is a law regulating commerce, inasmuch as it imposes new conditions and terms
on the coasting trade, on foreign trade generally, and on foreign trade as
regulated by treaties; and inasmuch as it interferes with the free navigation
of navigable waters.

63

If, then, the power of commercial regulation, possessed by Congress, be, in
regard to the great branches of it, exclusive; and if this grant of New-York
be a commercial regulation, effecting commerce, in respect to these great
branches, then the grant is void, whether any case of actual collision had
happened or not.

64

But, he contended, in the second place, that whether the grant were to be
regarded as wholly void or not, it must, at least, be inoperative, when the
rights claimed under it came in collision with other rights, enjoyed and
secured under the laws of the United States; and such collision, he
maintained, clearly existed in this case. It would not be denied that the law
of Congress was paramount. The constitution has expressly provided for that.
So that the only question in this part of the case is, whether the two rights
be inconsistent with each other. The appellant had a _right_ to go from New-
Jersey to New-York, in a vessel, owned by himself, of the proper legal
description, and enrolled and licensed according to law. This _right_ belonged
to him as a citizen of the United States. It was derived under the laws of the
United States, and no act of the Legislature of New-York can deprive him of
it, any more than such act could deprive him of the right of holding lands in
that State, or of suing in its Courts. It appears from the record, that the
boat in question was regularly enrolled, at Perth Amboy, and properly licensed
for carrying on the coasting trade. Under this enrolment, and with this
license, she was proceeding to New-York, when she was stopped by the
injunction of the Chancellor, on the application of the New-York grantees.
There can be no doubt that here is a collision, in fact; that which the
appellant claimed as a right, the respondent resisted; and there remains
nothing now but to determine, whether the appellant had, as he contends, a
_right_ to navigate these waters; because, if he had such _right_ , it must
prevail. Now, this right was expressly conferred by the laws of the United
States. The first section of the act of February, 1793, c. 8. regulating the
coasting trade and fisheries, declares, that all ships and vessels, enrolled
and licensed as that act provides, 'and no others, shall be deemed ships or
vessels of the United States, entitled to the privileges of ships or vessels
employed in the coasting trade or fisheries.' The fourth section of the same
declares, 'that in order to the licensing of any ship or vessel, for carrying
on the coasting trade or fisheries,' bond shall be given &c. according to the
provisions of the act. And the same section declares, that the owner having
complied with the requisites of the law, 'it shall be the duty of the
Collector to grant a license for carrying on the coasting trade;' and the act
proceeds to give the form and words of the license, which is, therefore, of
course, to be received as a part of the act; and the words of the license,
after the necessary recitals, are, 'license is hereby granted for the said
vessel to be employed in carrying on the coasting trade.'

65

Words could not make this authority more express.

66

The Court below seemed to him, with great deference, to have mistaken the
object and nature of the _license_. It seemed to have been of opinion that the
_license_ had no other intent or effect than to ascertain the ownership and
character of the vessel. But this was the peculiar office and object of the
_enrolment_. That document ascertains that the regular proof of ownership and
character has been given; and the _license_ is given, to confer the _right_ ,
to which the party has shown himself entitled. It is the authority which the
master carries with him, to prove his right to navigate freely the waters of
the United States, and to carry on the coasting trade.

67

In some of the discussions which had been had on this question, it had been
said, that Congress had only provided for ascertaining the ownership and
property of vessels, but had not prescribed to what _use_ they might be
applied. But this he thought an obvious error; the whole object of the act
regulating the coasting trade, was to declare what vessels shall enjoy the
benefit _of being used_ in the coasting trade. To secure this _use_ to certain
vessels, and to deny it to others, was precisely the purpose for which the act
was passed. The error, or what he humbly supposed to be the error, in the
judgment of the Court below, consisted in that Court's having thought, that
although Congress _might act_ , it had _not yet acted_ , in such a way as to
confer a _right_ on the appellant: whereas, if a right was not given by this
law, it never could be given; no law could be more express. It had been
admitted, that supposing there was a provision in the act of Congress, that
all vessels duly licensed should be at liberty to navigate, for the purpose of
trade and commerce, over all the navigable harbours, bays, rivers and lakes,
within the several States, any law of the States, creating particular
privileges as to any particular class of vessels, to the contrary
notwithstanding, the only question that could arise, in such a case, would be,
whether the law was constitutional; and that if that was to be granted or
decided, it would certainly, in all Courts and places, overrule and set aside
the State grant.

68

Now, he did not see that such supposed case could be distinguished from the
present. We show a provision in an act of Congress, that all vessels, duly
licensed, may carry on the coasting trade; nobody doubts the constitutional
validity of that law; and we show that this vessel was duly licensed according
to its provisions. This is all that is _essential_ in the case supposed. The
presence or absence of a _non obstante_ clause, cannot affect the extent or
operation of the act of Congress. Congress has no power of revoking State
laws, as a distinct power. It legislates over _subjects;_ and over those
subjects which are within its power, its legislation is supreme, and
necessarily overrules all inconsistent or repugnant State legislation. If
Congress were to pass an act expressly revoking or annulling, in whole or in
part, this New-York grant, such an act would be wholly useless and
inoperative. If the New-York grant be opposed to, or inconsistent with, any
constitutional power which Congress has exercised, then, so far as the
incompatibility exists, the grant is nugatory and void, necessarily, and by
reason of the supremacy of the law of Congress. But if the grant be not
inconsistent with any exercise of the powers of Congress, then, certainly,
Congress has no authority to revoke or annul it. Such an act of Congress,
therefore, would be either unconstitutional or supererogatory. The laws of
Congress need no _non obstante_ clause. The constitution makes them supreme,
when State laws come into opposition to them; so that in these cases there is
no question except this, whether there be, or be not, a repugnancy or
hostility between the law of Congress and the law of the State. Nor is it at
all material, in this view, whether the law of the State be a law regulating
commerce, or a law of police, or by whatever other name or character it may be
designated. If its provisions be inconsistent with an act of Congress, they
are void, so far as that inconsistency extends. The whole argument, therefore,
is substantially and effectually given up, when it is admitted, that Congress
might, by express terms, abrogate the State grant, or declare that it should
not stand in the way of its own legislation; because, such express terms would
add nothing to the effect and operation of an act of Congress.

69

He contended, therefore, upon the whole of this point, that a case of actual
collision had been made out, in this case, between the State grant and the act
of Congress; and as the act of Congress was entirely unexceptionable, and
clearly in pursuance of its constitutional powers, the State grant must yield.

70

There were other provisions of the constitution of the United States, which
had more or less bearing on this question: 'No State shall, without the
consent of Congress, lay any duty of tonnage.' Under colour of grants like
this, that prohibition might be wholly evaded. This grant authorizes Messrs.
Livingston and Fulton _to license_ navigation in the waters of New-York. They,
of course, license it on their own terms. They may require a pecuniary
consideration, ascertained by the tonnage of the vessel, or in any other
manner. Probably, in fact, they govern themselves, in this respect, by the
size or tonnage of the vessels, to which they grant licenses. Now, what is
this but substantially a _tonnage_ duty, under the law of the State? Or does
it make any difference, whether the receipts go directly to her own treasury,
or to the hands of those to whom she has made the grant?

71

There was, lastly, that provision of the constitution which gives Congress
power to promote the progress of science and the useful arts, by securing to
authors and inventors, for a limited time, an exclusive right to their own
writings and discoveries. Congress had exercised this power, and made all the
provisions which it deemed useful or necessary. The States might, indeed, like
munificent individuals, exercise their own bounty towards authors and
inventors, at their own discretion. But to confer reward by exclusive grants,
even if it were but a part of the use of the writing or invention, was not
supposed to be a power properly to be exercised by the States. Much less could
they, under the notion of conferring rewards in such cases, grant monopolies,
the enjoyment of which should be essentially incompatible with the exercise of
rights holden under the laws of the United States. He should insist, however,
the less on these points, as they were open to counsel, who would come after
him, on the same side, and as he had said so much upon what appeared to him
the more important and interesting part of the argument.

72

Mr. _Oakley_ , for the respondent, stated, that there were some general
principles applicable to this subject, which might be assumed, or which had
been settled by the decisions of this Court, and which had acquired the force
of maxims of political law. Among these was the principle, that the States do
not derive their independence and sovereignty from the grant or concession of
the British crown, but from their own act in the declaration of independence.
By this act, they became 'free and independent States,' and as such, 'have
full power to levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish
commerce, and to do all other acts and things which independent States may of
right do.' The State of New-York, having thus become sovereign and
independent, formed a constitution, by which the 'supreme legislative power'
was vested in its Legislature: and there are no restrictions on that power,
which in any manner relate to the present controversy. On the other hand, the
constitution of the United States is one of limited and expressly delegated
powers, which can only be exercised as granted, or in the cases enumerated.4
This principle, which distinguishes the national from the State governments,
is derived from the nature of the constitution itself, as being a delegation
of power, and not a restriction of power previously possessed; and from the
express stipulation in the 10th amendment, that 'the powers not delegated to
the United States by the constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are
reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.' The national
constitution must, therefore, be construed strictly, as regards the powers
_expressly granted_ , and the objects to which those powers are to be applied.
As it is a grant of power in derogation of State sovereignty, every portion of
power, not granted, must remain in the State Legislature.5

73

These principles are all founded on the doctrine, that a strict rule of
construction must be applied, in ascertaining the extent and object of those
powers which are _expressly_ delegated. The powers delegated are of two
classes: such as are _expressly granted_ , and such as are _implied_ , as
'necessary and proper' to carry into execution the powers expressly
enumerated. As to these implied powers, the constitution must be construed
liberally, as respects their nature and extent: because the constitution
implies that rule, by not undertaking to enumerate these powers, and because
the grant of these powers is general and unlimited. But this rule has one
exception: When the means of executing any expressly granted power are
particularly enumerated, then no other mode of executing that power can be
implied or used by Congress, since the constitution itself determines what
powers are 'necessary and proper' in that given case.

74

These delegated powers, whether express or implied, are, (1.) those which are
_exclusively_ vested in the United States; and, (2.) those which are
_concurrent_ in the United States and the respective States.

75

It is perfectly settled, that an affirmative grant of power to the United
States does not, of itself, devest the States of a like power.6 The
authorities cited settle this question, and it is no longer open for
discussion in this Court.

76

The powers vested exclusively in Congress are, (1.) Those which are granted in
express terms. (2.) Those which are granted to the United States, and
expressly prohibited to the States. (3.) Those which are exclusive in their
nature.

77

All powers, _exclusive in their nature_ , may be included under two heads:
(1.) Those which have their origin in the constitution, and where the object
of them did not exist previous to the Union. These may be called strictly
_national_ powers. (2.) Those powers which, by other provisions in the
constitution, have an effect and operation, when exercised by a State, without
or beyond the territorial limits of the State.

78

As examples of the first class, may be mentioned, the 'power to borrow money
on the credit of the United States.' Here the object of the power, (to borrow
money for the use of the United States,) and the means of executing it, (by
pledging their credit,) have their origin in the Union, and did not previously
exist. So as to the power 'to establish tribunals inferior to the Supreme
Court,' the same remark will apply.

79

Of the second class, the power 'to establish an uniform rule of
naturalization,' is an instance. This power was originally in the States, and
was extensively exercised by them, and would now be concurrent, except for
another provision in the constitution, that 'citizens of each State shall be
entitled to all the privileges and immunities of citizens in the several
States.'7 It is not held to be exclusive, from the use of the term ' _uniform_
rule.' This Court has held, that the use of an analogous term, 'uniform laws,'
in respect to the associated subject of bankruptcy, does not imply an
exclusive power in Congress over that subject.8 The true reason why the power
of establishing an uniform rule of naturalization is exclusive, must be, that
a person becoming a citizen in one State, would thereby become a citizen of
another, perhaps even contrary to its laws, and the power thus exercised would
operate beyond the limits of the State.

80

As to _concurrent_ powers: it is highly important to hold all powers
concurrent, where it can be done without violating the plain letter of the
constitution. All these powers are essential to State sovereignty, and are
constantly exercised for the good of the State. These powers can be best
exercised by the State, in relation to all its internal concerns, connected
with the objects of the power. All powers, therefore, not expressly exclusive,
or clearly exclusive in their nature, ought to be deemed concurrent. All
_implied_ powers are, of course, concurrent. It has never yet been contended,
that powers implied as necessary and proper to carry into effect an exclusive
power, are themselves exclusive. Such a doctrine would deprive the States
almost entirely of sovereignty, as these implied powers must inevitably be
very numerous, and must embrace a wide field of legislation. So also, all
_enumerated_ powers are to be considered _concurrent_ , unless they clearly
fall under the head of _exclusive:_ either as being granted, in terms,
exclusively to the United States, or as expressly prohibited to the States, or
as being exclusive in their nature, as before explained.

81

A power exclusive in its nature, is said to be _repugnant_ and contradictory
to a like power in the States. This repugnancy exists only in cases where a
State cannot legislate, in any manner, or under any circumstances, under a
given power, without conflicting with some existing act of Congress, or with
some provision of the constitution. Thus, it is laid down by the commentators
on the constitution, that 'the power granted to the Union is exclusive, when
the existence of a similar power in the States would be _absolutely and
totally contradictory and repugnant_.'9 'Or where an authority is granted to
the Union, with which a similar authority in the State would be _utterly
incompatible_.'10 And again: 'It is not a mere possibility of _inconvenience_
in the exercise of powers, but an _immediate constitutional repugnancy_ , that
can, by implication, alienate and extinguish a pre-existing right of
sovereignty.'11 These strong expressions show that the repugnancy of power to
power must be such, as to produce actual interference and conflict, under all
circumstances, and in all cases, in which the power is exercised by the two
governments: or, in other words, must be such that the States can pass no law
on the subject matter of the power, without contravening the express
provisions of the constitution; or without actually interfering with the
operation of some statute of Congress. These terms are used by the author of
the papers from which they are quoted, to distinguish those cases of
_absolute_ repugnancy from others, 'where the exercise of a concurrent
jurisdiction might be productive of _occasional_ interference in the polioy of
any branch of administration, but would not imply any direct contradiction or
repugnancy in point of constitutional authority.'12 The same principle has
been adopted by this Court on several occasions.13

82

It appears, then, that the repugnancy which makes a power exclusive, must be
clear, direct, positive, and entire. It cannot be a matter of speculation or
theory, but must be practical: not a repugnancy that _may_ arise in some
exercise of the power by both governments; but one that _must_ arise, in any
exercise of such power, which is attempted by the States. To ascertain, then,
whether any given power be concurrent, we must inquire, (1.) Whether it was
possessed by the States, previous to the constitution, as appertaining to
their sovereignty? (2.) Whether it is granted, in exclusive terms, to the
Union? (3.) Whether it is granted to the Union, and prohibited in express
terms to the States? (4.) Whether it is exclusive in its nature, either as
operating, when exercised by the States, without their territorial limits, and
upon other parts of the Union; _or_ as having its origin and creation in the
Union itself; _or_ as being so entirely repugnant, that no exercise of it can
take place by the States, without actual conflict with the constitution of the
Union, in its practical operation and effects.

83

All concurrent powers may be divided into two classes: (1.) Those where, from
their nature, when Congress has acted on the subject matter, the States cannot
legislate at all in any degree. (2.) Those where the States may legislate,
though Congress has previously legislated on the same subject matter.

84

The _first_ class includes those instances where any act of Congress covers
the whole ground of legislation, and exhausts the subjects on which it acts.
Such is the power to fix the standard of weights and measures. Here, when the
standard of any particular weight or measure is fixed by Congress, the whole
power is executed as to that particular; and so far the power of the States is
at an end. But, until Congress does this, it cannot be doubted that a State
may act on the subject; and if the laws of Congress apply only to some weights
and measures, all others are subject to State regulation. Thus, New-York has
long had a law to regulate weights and measures, which establishes the English
standard for that State, 'until Congress shall establish the standard for the
United States.'14 So, also, the power to regulate the value of foreign coin.
An act fixing the value of any species of coin, necessarily disposes of the
whole power as to that species. They are both instances in which, when
Congress has acted at all, there immediately arises that entire and absolute
repugnancy, and that utter incompatibility, which exclude the States from all
power over the subject.

85

The _second_ class of concurrent powers contains those in which, from their
nature, various regulations may be made, without any actual collision in
practice. These are, those where the power may be exercised on different
subjects; _or_ on the same subject, in different modes; _or_ where the object
of the power admits of various independent regulations, which may operate
together. In all these cases, the State may legislate, though Congress has
legislated under the same power. This results from the very nature of
concurrent power. Each party possessing the power, may of course use it. Each
being sovereign as to the power, may use it in any form, and in relation to
any subject; and to guard against a conflict in practice, the law of Congress
is made supreme.

86

The provision, that the law of Congress shall be the supreme law in such
cases, is the ground of a conclusive inference, not only that there are
concurrent powers, but that those powers may be exercised by both governments
at the same time. One law cannot be said to be superior to another, and to
control it, unless it acts in a manner inconsistent with and repugnant to that
other. The question of supremacy, therefore, can never arise, unless in cases
of actual conflict or interference. If the mere exercise of a power by
Congress takes away all right from the State to act under that power, then any
State law, under such a power, would be void; not as conflicting with the
supreme law of Congress, but as being repugnant to the provisions of the
constitution itself, and as being passed by the State, in the first instance,
without authority. If this doctrine were true, then the provision that the
laws of Congress should be supreme, was entirely idle. It would have been
sufficient to have said merely, that the constitution should be supreme.15
These positions are all supported by the judgments of this Court, and of other
Courts whose authority deserves to be respected.

87

From this mass of authority, and the reasons on which it is founded, it
results, (1.) That a State may legislate in all cases of concurrent power,
though Congress has acted under the same power and upon the same subject
matter. (2.) That the question of supremacy cannot arise, except in the case
of actual and practical collision. (3.) That such collision must be direct and
positive, and the State law must operate to limit, restrict, or defeat, the
effect of a statute of Congress. (4.) That in such case, the State law yields
in those particulars, in which such actual collision arises, but remains valid
in all other respects.

88

The States have, accordingly, acted upon this construction to a great extent.
Thus, the power to lay and collect _taxes_ , is admitted on all hands to be
concurrent. It is constantly exercised by the States, in every form, and both
real and personal estate have frequently been taxed by the national and local
governments, at the same time. So, under the power to lay and collect
_excises_ , the same article has frequently been taxed by both governments.
And the power to lay imposts, or duties on exports, and imports, and tonnage,
is also concurrent, except that no State can lay any duty on imports and
exports, or duty of tonnage, unless such as are absolutely necessary for
executing its inspection laws. So, also, the power to provide for the
punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the United
States, is a power which may be exercised by the States. A State may make it
an offence to counterfeit the coin of any foreign country within its
territory. Thus, New-York has provided for the punishment of counterfeiting
'any of the species of gold or silver coins, now current, or hereafter to be
current in this State.'16 And Congress has provided for the punishment of
counterfeiting 'any gold or silver coin of the United States,' or of any
'foreign gold or silver coins, which, by law, now are, or hereafter shall be
made current, or be in actual use and circulation as money, within the United
States.'17 New-York has punished the counterfeiting of 'any promissory note,
for the payment of money,' including notes made by any body corporate;18 and
under this the counterfeiting of the notes of the bank of the United States is
punished. Congress has punished the same offence in the law incorporating the
bank of the United States.19 In all these acts of Congress, relating to coins
and bank notes, it is provided, 'that nothing in them contained shall be so
construed as to deprive the Courts of the individual States of jurisdiction,
under the laws of the several States, over any offence made punishable by
these acts.' This shows that Congress considered the power to punish these
offences as concurrent, and that it could be exercised by the States on the
ground of their own inherent authority, as it is held that Congress cannot
delegate any part of the criminal jurisdiction of the United States to the
State tribunals.20 Again: the power to provide for organizing, arming, and
disciplining the militia, is a concurrent power, according to the same
principles.21 But the States have been in the constant habit of superadding to
the regulations of Congress, additional provisions, suited to their own views
and local circumstances.22 These instances, which might be greatly multiplied,
show the practical construction put, both by Congress and the State
Legislatures, upon these concurrent powers.

89

The learned counsel here recapitulated the principles laid down, and proceeded
to apply them to the discussion of the cause, which he divided into two
branches. (1.) The supposed repugnancy of the laws of New-York to the power of
Congress on the subject of patents and copy-rights. (2.) Their supposed
conflict with the power of Congress to regulate commerce.

90

As to the first, the words of the constitution are, 'Congress shall have power
to promote the progress of science and the useful arts, by securing, for
limited times, to authors and inventors, the exclusive right to their
respective writings and discoveries.' This power is _concurrent_ , according
to all the principles before laid down. It is clearly a power appertaining to
sovereignty, and, as such, vested in the Legislature of New-York, before the
formation of the United States' constitution. A power to promote science and
the useful arts, is highly important to every civilized society. It embraces
all the means of education, and all kinds of mechanical labour and
improvements. It is constantly exercised by all governments, as a sovereign
authority, by laws for the promotion of education in all its branches, by
bounties for the encouragement of discoveries and new methods of business, and
by the grant of exclusive rights and privileges for the same end. It has
frequently been exercised by the State of New-York, and by other States,
before the adoption of the constitution. It is not granted exclusively to
Congress. No exclusive terms are used. The grant is affirmative and general,
like all the other powers. There is no express prohibition upon the States
against the exercise of it. Nor is it exclusive in its nature. It does not owe
its existence or creation to the Union. When exercised by a State, it does not
operate in any manner beyond the territorial jurisdiction of that State. From
its nature, it admits of a great variety of regulations, both by local and
general laws, which may exist harmoniously together. Being thus a concurrent
power, it follows, according to the principles already established, that the
State may exercise it at all times, and in every mode, until an actual and
practical conflict arises between a right exercised under a statute of
Congress, and the same right claimed to be exercised under the State.

91

The power, as granted in the constitution, is a limited power. It is a clear
principle, that when the means of executing any given power are specified in
the grant, Congress cannot take, by implication, any other means, as being
necessary and proper to carry that power into execution. This power, then, is
limited: (1.) As to the persons and the objects in regard to which it may be
exercised: these are, 'authors and inventors, writings and discoveries.' This
enumeration excludes all right in Congress to legislate on the subject of any
_improvement_ , which is not an 'invention,' either domestic or foreign. It
excludes also all right to legislate for the benefit of any person who is not
himself the 'inventor.' (2.) As to the means of executing the power, and the
time during which those means may be exercised. They are by ' _securing_ the
exclusive right for _limited times_.'

92

The power, considered in itself, is supreme, unlimited, and plenary. No part
of any sovereign power can be annihilated. Whatever portion, then, of this
power, was not granted to Congress, remains in the States. Consequently, the
States have exclusive authority to promote science and the arts, by all other
modes than those specified in the constitution, without limitation as to time,
person, or object; and the Legislature is the sole judge of the expediency of
any law on the subject.

93

But this power, though limited in Congress, is still (as has been seen)
concurrent in the States. It follows, then, from all the principles before
laid down relative to the exercise of concurrent powers, that a State may
exercise it by the same means, and towards the same persons and objects with
Congress. A State may, therefore, grant patents and copy-rights, which would
secure to the inventors and authors, the benefit of their discoveries and
writings, within the limits of the State. In such cases, the citizens of other
States might use the invention, or publish the book at pleasure. But if a
patent or copy-right should be obtained under the law of Congress, the right
under the State grant would cease as against that of the United States.
Suppose the author or inventor does not apply for a patent or copy-right from
the United States, or is willing to secure the exclusive right within any one
State only, and leave the invention common in every other part of the Union;
may not that one State secure the right within its own territory? This
question may be answered by seeing how far Congress has exercised the power.
An examination of the different patent laws will show, that Congress has, in
various particulars, omitted to exercise the entire power given to them by the
constitution. Thus, by several of these laws, the right of obtaining a patent
is confined to _citizens_ , and, consequently, the power of granting patents
to _aliens_ , is left to the States. The whole power is inoperative, until
Congress acts under it by legislating: and the a patent. In every case,
therefore, the power is unexecuted until a patent is actually granted. The
State may consequently act in all cases.

94

But Congress has confined its statutes to cases of invention, as the
constitution directs. Where then is the power to reward or encourage the
introduction of useful machines or inventions from abroad? or, the
establishment of any art, when invented at home, and the discoverer does not
apply for a patent? or, where the invention is given to the public, and great
expense must be incurred to put it into use? All these things appertain to
sovereignty. Congress has no power over them. The power, being sovereign, must
exist somewhere, and is, therefore, exclusively in the States. If the nature
of the power which is given to Congress be examined, it will be found that it
confers no authority to create or grant any right or property. It is clearly
founded on the presumption, that the right or property may exist, independent
of the power. Thus, one of the commentators on the constitution says, 'The
copy-right of authors has been solemnly adjudged, in Great Britain, to be a
right at common law. The right to useful inventions seems, with equal reason,
to belong to the inventor.'23 The adjudication here referred to, is that of
_Millar v. Taylor_ ,24 where it was held, that the author of any book has the
sole right of first printing and publishing it, but that the right was
controlled by the provisions of the stat. 8 Ann, relative to copy-rights. But,
the common law of England was the law of New-York, at the adoption of the
national constitution. There was no statute of New-York similar to that of
Ann, and, of course, the right existed there, without the security for its
enjoyment, provided by that statute. The right, also, was local, and confined
to the territorial jurisdiction of the State. The policy and object of the
constitution was, to secure the right co-extensively with the Union. Its
exercise in any one State, might be affected in its operation by the pirating
of books and inventions in the adjoining States, and that evil could only be
corrected by the national Legislature. The right, therefore, in any one State,
was imperfect only as to the security and the means of enjoyment.

95

It appears, then, that the power is founded on the basis of a pre-existing
right of property, from the nature and origin of the right, as before stated,
and from the terms in which the power itself is granted. The word 'secure,'
implies the existence of something _to be secured_. It does not purport to
create or give any new right, but only to secure and provide remedies to
enforce a preexisting right throughout the Union. This power differs
essentially from the sovereign power to create and grant an exclusive right.
It has been adjudged, under the English stat. 21 Jac. I. c. 3. that a grant
may be made for any invention which is new in England, though known abroad.25
That statute, therefore, authorizes the creation of a right of property in a
thing imported, in which no right of property, under the laws of England,
before existed. But the patent laws of the United States merely extend to
inventions actually made in the United States, and not to any imported
invention. The whole extent of the sovereign power, exercised by the British
Parliament, on this subject, was vested in the Legislature of New-York. A part
only was given to Congress, and all the residue remains in the State
exclusively.

96

What then is the effect of a patent? It creates no new right. In secures the
patentee, for a limited time, the exclusive right to his invention; so that he
has the same exclusive right in it, that he has in any other kind of property.
His right, however, is secured more extensively than any State law could
secure it. But, within the limits of the State, a patent under the local law
would be just as effectual. What is the situation of the right, after the
expiration of a patent? The right under the common law of the State, may be
considered as perpetual. It was so ruled by the Judges in _Millar v. Taylor;_
but it was determined in the House of Lords, that the perpetuity of the right
was controlled and limited by the statute of Ann. There is no such statute in
New-York, and, therefore, the right remains as at common law. The act of
Congress cannot destroy the perpetuity of a right held under the law of New-
York, and which the act of Congress has only secured for a certain time, to a
greater extent, and by means of more, effectual remedies. The right, then,
remains, at the expiration of the patent, in the same condition as at its
commencement, so far as regards the laws of New-York, and within the
territorial limits of that State, but cannot be asserted in other States. Even
if this were not so, and it should be considered that the right becomes
common, at the expiration of the patent, then it is like all other common
rights, subject to the control of the municipal laws of the State. It is of
the essence of sovereignty to control and regulate all common rights. The
Legislature, possessing 'supreme legislative power,' may destroy a common
right, either by abolishing it, and prohibiting the use of it altogether, or
by convering it into an exclusive right. Thus, a right of way may be common,
either by land or water, and it may be shut up by law, and the use of it
prohibited. So, a right of fishery, in navigable waters, is common, and it may
be prohibited altogether, or converted into a several fishery. In the same
manner, as to patent rights and literary productions: if, after a patent or
copy-right has expired, the right to use or publish becomes common, it may be
controlled by law, and turned into a private right. So that a State law may
continue or extend a patent-right at pleasure.

97

Thus, it follows, that whether the right of the patentee remains in him, after
the expiration of his patent, at common law, or whether its use becomes common
to all, it is subject to the State law, in the same manner, and to the same
extent, as all other rights, and may, consequently, be controlled, limited,
extended, or prohibited, at the pleasure of the Legislature.

98

But the State may control or prohibit the use of any patented thing, during
the existence of the patent. If an inventor do not apply for a patent for the
invention, no other man can. The right of the inventor, in such a case,
remains as at common law. Every right or kind of property, created by the laws
of the State, is subject to be controlled and regulated by the supreme
legislative power of the State. It cannot then be doubted, that before a
patent is obtained, the State may prohibit the use of the thing invented;
either on the ground that it is mischievous in itself, or from motives of
general policy, that it is inexpedient to permit it. As, if it interferes with
any general interest, as a labour saving machine, which might deprive great
numbers of their ordinary means of subsistence: or, if it should effect any
great change in the course of business, which the Legislature might deem
injurious, as it relates to the community. Of these questions of general
policy, and of the expediency of any such prohibition, the Legislature must,
of course, be the sole judge. Thus, in the act of New-York, to incorporate the
North River Steam-boat Company, the corporation is prohibited from using any
of its boats for the purpose of carrying freight. This was done to protect the
great shipping interest employed in the navigation of the Hudson River. Would
this exercise of power be affected by the obtaining of a patent? The object
and effect of a patent is, (as we have seen,) to secure a pre-existing right,
imperfect as to its means of enjoyment and its extent. The patentee obtains
nothing by his grant, except an exclusive right, as it relates to the Union,
instead of a right limited to the State, together with more complete and
certain remedies to protect and enforce that right. If, therefore, he could
not use the thing invented, against the State law, before it is patented,
neither can he thus use it after it is patented, for his grant conveys no
greater right than before existed. It is the undoubted attribute of all
sovereignty, to regulate and control the use of all property. A thing
patented, when made and put in use, is nothing more than property; and, like
all other property, is subject to the control of the sovereign power, as to
the right to use it. There can be no doubt that it may sometimes become
important or necessary to the welfare of society, to regulate or prohibit the
use of a thing patented. Congress cannot do this, or, at least, it has not
done it. After the patent is granted, the power of Congress over the subject
matter is exhausted. Patented things may be dangerous or noxious, either
universally so in every part of the country, or locally; or, they may be
useful at one time, and mischievous and noxious at another. Patented
manufactures may be injurious to the public health, though highly useful as
manufactures; or they may be nuisances to private individuals and
neighbourhoods, though extremely useful to the public. Can Congress provide by
its laws for the abatement of a public nuisance? or give a right of action to
an individual for a private nuisance? If not, these powers must reside in the
States. The right to use all property, must be subject to modification by
municipal law. _Sic_ _utere tuo ut alienum non loedas_ , is a fundamental
maxim. It belongs exclusively to the local State Legislatures, to determine
how a man may use his own, without injuring his neighbour. Can a patent give
rights, by which a patentee may infringe the vested rights of others? Can a
patented boat be used on a ferry, the exclusive use of which has been granted
by a State law?

99

This argument may be illustrated by the power to secure to authors the
exclusive right to their works. This power is founded on the same reasons with
the other, and gives the author the same rights as the inventor. Can the
author, by virtue of his copy-right, publish against the prohibition of State
law? A book may be libellous, or blasphemous, or obscene. Cannot the author be
indicted and punished for it? May not a citizen maintain an action for the
libel? If so, it cannot be lawful by virtue of the copy-right. If the State
can punish the act of publishing, it may entirely prohibit the publication. It
may regulate and restrain the press, so far as it is not prohibited by its own
constitution.

100

The laws of Congress are framed on the supposition that the power to prohibit
remains in the States. By the existing statute, they have not provided that
any inquiry shall be made as to the _utility_ of the supposed invention, when
the patent is applied for. There is no authority to refuse a patent, on the
ground of the inutility of the invention, and in practice, no inquiry is ever
made, and patents issue, of course, on making the oaths and paying the fees,
even for things the most trifling, absurd, and injurious. There is no
provision for the repeal of a patent, on the ground of its noxious or useless
character. The law does not purport, in its terms, to give a right to use the
thing patented, against the provisions of any State law. The act provides, (s.
1.) that if any person shall present a petition, 'signifying a desire of
_obtaining an exclusive property_ ,' &c. then a patent shall issue, granting
to the petitioner 'the full and exclusive right and liberty of making,
constructing, using, and vending to others to be used,' the thing patented.
The 'exclusive property' spoken of, is only the same property that exists in
any thing else, and, of itself, gives no right to use the thing against the
State law, any more than in the case of any other property. The words 'using,
and vending to others to be used,' are inserted to make the description of
that 'exclusive property' complete. The words 'making, constructing, and
vending,' would not have constituted entire property in the thing, as one
might make and vend, and all the world might use. The patentee's right of
property might thus be greatly invaded, and he would be left without remedy,
except against the 'maker.' The word 'using,' in the act, must receive this
limited construction, or the law of Congress goes beyond the power in the
constitution. That was only to 'secure' a right, and meant nothing more than
that a patentee should enjoy it alone, if any body was permitted to enjoy it.
But it was never intended that the patentee should set the State laws at
defiance. The acts relative to copy-rights, strongly support this position.
These acts contain no provision to ascertain the character of the books or
engravings to be published, and whether they be such as may be safely
permitted, consistently with the good order of society and public morals. They
grant the same right to the author, as the patent grants to the inventor. In
both cases, they depend on the same constitutional right, and only convey a
right to prevent others from using or publishing without his consent, but not
to enable him to use or publish without restraint.

101

If a State can thus control a right to use a thing patented, directly, it may
do it indirectly. If by a positive law, then, through the agency of the
Courts, by injunction or otherwise. Or, the right to prohibit the use of it
may be delegated to individuals, either acting as public agents, or in their
own behalf, to protect some other right vested in them; and may forbid the use
of the thing patented, or the publication of the book, the copy-right of which
has been secured, without their license. So that if an exclusive grant be made
by a State law to an individual, with a provision that the thing granted shall
not be used in the State, without license of the grantee, and there be a
patent under the act of Congress for the same thing, the consequence would be,
that the State grantee could not use it, because it would be a violation of
the patent, and the patentee could not, without the license of the State
grante, because the State law prohibited him. Thus, the State law would be
inoperative, so far as it granted the exclusive right; but valid, so far as it
prohibited the use of the thing patented. These principles may be applied to
the law now in question, which gives an exclusive right, and forbids any
person to use the thing which is the subject of the right, without the license
of the persons in whom it is vested. It contains a granting clause, and a
prohibiting clause. The injunction is founded on the prohibition, and may be
enforced, though the grantees might not use their right. Let it be supposed
that, from reasons of public policy, the laws of New-York had prohibited the
use of steam boats entirely, and had directed the Court of Chancery to
restrain them by injunction, would not the prohibition have been a valid one?
and if so, may not the State determine that it is against the public interest,
that steam boats should be built or navigated, unless under the direction, or
with the license, of an individual, who may be thought particularly skilful in
that business? It might, therefore, be contended, that this injunction is to
be sustained, whatever might become of the respondent's exclusive right.

102

A State may prohibit the use of a thing patented, by virtue of its power over
the public domain. A patented thing cannot be used on the private property of
an individual, without his consent. The power of the State over the public
property, is, at least, equal to that of an individual over his own; and
particularly so, as to the navigable rivers in the State, which are,
emphatically, the property of the people of the State, and subject to their
authority, acting through the local Legislature.

103

The question has hitherto been discussed, as if the exclusive right claimed by
the respondents, was the right to an invention, for which a patent may have
been, or may yet be obtained. But in truth, his right is not to the use of any
invention, or of any thing for which a patent can be granted. Livingston and
Fulton do not, on the face of the acts granting or securing the right, claim
to be the inventors of any thing. In the act of 1798, c. 55. s. 21. it is
recited, that R. R. L. 'is the _possessor_ of a mode of applying the steam
engine to the propelling of vessels, on new and advantageous principles.' It
is not alleged or pretended, that he was the discoverer of that mode, or of
the principles of its application; or that the mode, or the principles, were
secret or unknown to the rest of the world. His right, therefore, is to the
use of an improvement, introduced (perhaps) from a foreign country, and,
consequently, not the subject of a patent, and in respect to which Congress
has no power to legislate at all. On the other hand, it does not appear, that
the appellant has a patent for any thing connected with the subject of steam
boats, or for any thing belonging to the steam engine, which can be used in
navigation by steam. He can, therefore, claim no right, in this case, under
the patent laws; and there is no question as to any actual conflict between
the State right and a patent right. He is, consequently, compelled to rely
upon the broad ground, that the State has no power to legislate at all, for
the encouragement of any art or science, or for any improvement connected
therewith, because Congress has legislated under a power which is partial in
its extent, both as to objects and time.

104

The result of all that has been said, tends to establish, that the power in
the constitution is strictly a concurrent power. That it is also a limited
power in Congress to promote science and the arts, by particular means, and in
regard to particular objects, and for limited times. That all the residue of
the power, to promote science and the arts, by all other means, and towards
all persons and objects, and for unlimited times, remains exclusively in the
States. That the States may legislate, in pursuance of this concurrent power,
in all cases, and can grant exclusive rights to any thing which may be the
subject of a patent, which will be valid within their own territory until a
patent is actually issued under the authority of the Union. That when a patent
issues, the State has full power to prohibit or control the use of it within
its territory, though it cannot grant the right to use the patented thing to
others. That it may exercise the power of prohibition, partially or totally,
by direct legislative acts, or through the medium of its Courts, and may
delegate the right to prohibit to any of its citizens. That in the present
case, the right of prohibition has been delegated to Livingston and Fulton;
and the mode of exercising that right, is by injunction out of Chancery. That
this right of prohibition may be valid, even though the grant of the exclusive
right to use, &c., might be invalid. That the State laws are, therefore,
valid, even on the supposition that the right granted by them, was to an
invention which might be patented; and that they would be valid, as to their
prohibitions, even were a patent issued for the same object. But that, in
truth, the right in question, has no connection with any thing that can be the
subject of a patent; and if it has, that no patent has, in fact, issued to the
appellant, nor does he, in any mode, claim a right under a patent. That the
question, therefore, on this branch of the cause, is reduced to the inquiry,
whether the State may legislate under a power, confessedly concurrent, when
Congress has not acted at all, or when no person sets up a right under any act
of Congress.

105

But the laws of New-York, now in question, are supposed to be in conflict with
the constitutional power of Congress, 'to regulate commerce with foreign
nations, among the several States, and with the Indian tribes.'

106

That is a concurrent power, according to all the principles before laid down.
It was fully possessed by the States, after the declaration of independence,
and constantly exercised. It is one of the attributes of sovereignty,
specially designated in that instrument, 'to establish commerce.' It is not
granted, in exclusive terms, to Congress. It is not prohibited, generally, to
the States. The only express restraints upon the power of the States, in this
respect, are against laying any impost or duty on imports or exports, (except
for the execution of their own inspection laws,) or of tonnage; against making
any agreement or compact with a foreign power; and against entering into any
treaty. All these prohibitions, being partial, are founded on the supposition,
that the whole power resided in the States. They are, accordingly, all in
restraint of State power. It is a clear principle of interpretation, that
where a general power is given, but not in exclusive terms, and the States are
restrained, in express terms, from exercising that power in particular cases,
that in all other cases, the power remains in the States as a concurrent
power. Thus, the commentators on the constitution, speaking of the taxing
power, say, 'this restriction implies an admission that, if it were not
inserted, the States would possess the power it excludes. And it implies a
further admission, that, as to all other taxes, the authority of the States
remains undiminished.'26 And, again: 'In all cases in which the restriction
does not apply, the States would have a concurrent power with the Union.' This
doctrine applies precisely to the power to regulate commerce. Laying imposts
or duties of tonnage, is a part of the power to regulate commerce; and the
making of a compact or agreement with other States or nations, is the only
method by which a State could make any commercial regulation, which, as it
regards its own citizens, would operate boyond its territorial limits. These
restrictions imply, that the general power to regulate commerce, is
concurrently in the States, and that it may be exercised by the States in all
cases to which these prohibitions do not extend. But, the same implication is
still stronger from the nature and terms of those prohibitory clauses. The
State may lay duties on imports and exports, to execute its _inspection laws_.
That class of laws are, or may be, essential regulations of commerce, and they
derive their authority altogether from State power. The existence of a power
to pass them, is, therefore, expressly recognised by the constitution. So,
also, a State may lay any duty upon imports or exports, or of tonnage, with
the consent of Congress. This provision implies, that the power to lay all
duties remains essentially in the States; that the exercise of the power is
suspended, until Congress consent; and that, when the consent is given, the
State law acts of itself, and by State authority alone. The States no where
derive any powers from the constitution. All its provisions are in restraint
of their authority, and the consent of Congress, in this instance only removes
the restraint. A State may not enter into any treaty; but, with the consent of
Congress, may enter into an agreement or compact with another State, or with a
foreign power. A treaty is made with a view to the public welfare, either in
perpetuity, or for a considerable length of time, and binds the whole Union. A
compact or agreement is generally temporary in its nature and operation, and
is executed by a single act, and binds only the State that makes it. In this
sense the constitution must be understood, when it speaks of _trcaties_ as
distinguished from _compacts_. It follows, that general and permanent
commercial regulations with foreign powers, must be made by treaty, but that
particular and temporary regulations of commerce may be made by an agreement
of a State with another, or with a foreign power, by the consent of Congress.
But, in this case, the compact would derive all its efficacy from the original
inherent power of the State, not from the act of consent by Congress, which
would merely remove an existing restraint.

107

There is nothing in the nature of this power, which renders it exclusive in
Congress. The power itself does not grow out of the Union, like the power 'to
borrow money on the credit of the United States.' It does not operate, when
exercised by a State beyond its territorial limits, like the power of
naturalization. There is no necessary repugnancy between the acts of the two
governments under this power, since it clearly admits of a great variety of
regulations, which may operate together, without direct interference. The
restraints specially imposed on the power of the State, relating to commerce,
would have been unnecessary, if it were not considered as a concurrent power.

108

The practice of the States shows that the power has always been considered as
concurrent. Thus, the State of New-York has passed numerous laws, which are
regulations of commerce with foreign nations, with other States, and with the
Indian tribes.1 As to that part of the power which relates to trade with the
Indian tribes, the people here referred to may be within the limits of a
State. Thus, the commentators on the constitution consider it in that light,
and contrast the power with that relating to the same subject in the old
confederation, which was qualified so as 'not to infringe the legislative
rights of any State within its own limits.'2 Thus, Congress has legislated on
that basis. By the act to regulate trade and intercourse with the Indian
tribes, it is provided, s. 19, 'that nothing contained in the act shall be so
construed as to prevent any trade with Indians, on lands surrounded by
settlements of citizens, and being within the ordinary jurisdiction of any of
the individual States.' But the State of New-York has also legislated on the
same subject, and by the 'act relative to the different tribes and nations of
Indians within this State,' prohibits the purchase of land from any Indian,
without the authority of the Legislature; prohibits the sale of various
articles to any Indian or tribe; makes numerous other regulations, as to trade
and intercourse with them, by the citizens who surround them, so as to cover
the whole ground over which Congress has declared its act should not extend.
An examinatien of the laws of other States, will show that many of them have
legislated, under every part of this power, to the same extent, and, in some
cases, to a greater extent than New-York; and will show the havoc which must
be made in the State laws, if this power is not to be considered concurrent.

109

This power is not only concurrent, but is _limited_ in Congress. It does not
extend to the regulation of the internal commerce of any State. This results
from the terms used in the grant of power, 'among the several States.' It
results also from the effects of a contrary doctrine, on the whole mass of
State power. Internal commerce must be that which is wholly carried on within
the limits of a State: as where the commencement, progress, and termination of
the voyage, are wholly confined to the territory of the State. This branch of
power includes a vast range of State legislation, such as turnpike roads, toll
bridges, exclusive rights to run stage wagons, auction licenses, licenses to
retailers, and to hawkers and pedlers, ferries over navigable rivers and
lakes, and all exclusive rights to carry goods and passengers, by land or
water. All such laws must necessarily affect, to a great extent, the foreign
trade, and that between the States, as well as the trade among the citizens of
the same State. But, although these laws do thus affect trade and commerce
with other States, Congress cannot interfere, as its power does not reach the
regulation of internal trade, which resides exclusively in the States.

110

It has thus been seen, that this power is concurrent; and as such, may be
exercised by the States, subject, like all other concurrent powers, to the
power of Congress, when actually exercised; and that it is limited, not
extending to the internal trade of a State. We contend, that the exclusive
right claimed by the respondent is valid, considered either as a regulation of
intercourse and trade among the several States, or as a regulation of the
internal navigation of the State.

111

Considering it then, as a regulation of trade among the States, it becomes
necessary to inquire into the foundation of the right of intercourse among the
States, either for the purposes of commerce, or residence and travelling. From
the declaration of independence, in 1776, until the establishment of the
confederation, in 1781, the States were entirely and absolutely sovereign, and
foreign to each other, as regarded their respective rights and powers are
separate societies of men. During that period, the right of intercourse among
them rested solely on the _jus commune_ of nations. By the law of nations, the
right of commerce has its foundation in the obligation resting upon all men,
mutually to assist each other, and to contribute to the happiness of their
fellow creatures. Right on one side, springs from obligation on the other. The
right to purchase, springs from the obligation to sell. 'One nation has,
therefore, a natural right to purchase of another the things which it wants,
and which the other does not need.' The law of nations being only the
application of the law of nature, as regulating the rights and obligations of
individuals, to nations and sovereign States, this is the foundation of the
right of buying. But the right of selling does not impose any obligation on
another nation to buy, as that other may not want, and must be the sole judge
of its own necessities.3 It follows, then, that any State has a natural right
to purchase of any other the articles which it needs, and to open a commercial
intercourse for that purpose; but that every State, being under no obligation
to purchase of another, may, at its pleasure, prohibit the introduction of any
foreign merchandise. These rights of purchasing are not perfect rights, and of
course connot be enforced by one nation against another; and, being thus
imperfect, it depends upon the will of each nation, whether it will carry on
any commerce with another, or upon what terms and under what regulations.
These imperfect rights, like all other imperfect rights between nations, can
become perfect only by treaty; the effect of which, is to _secure_ to a nation
rights of commerce or intercourse, which it before enjoyed at the will of
another. The right of travelling, or of entering into and residing in one
nation by the citizens or subjects of another, depends on the same principles
of international law. But the sovereign may forbid the entrance into his
territory, either to foreigners in general, or in particular cases, and under
particular circumstances, or as to particular individuals, and for particular
purposes.4 And as he may prohibit the entrance altogether, he may annex what
conditions he pleases to the permission to enter. In the absence of any treaty
stipulation, and of any prohibitory regulations, the natural right would
exist, and might be exercised and enjoyed.

112

This being the relation subsisting between sovereign States, it follows, that
before the confederation, each State enjoyed the right of intercourse with all
the others, at the will of those others, both as respects the transit and
residence of persons, and the introduction and sale of property. The
confederation was a _treaty_ between sovereign States, and 'the better to
secure and perpetuate mutual friendship and intercourse among the people of
the different States,' stipulated, that the free inhabitants of each State
should have 'free ingress and egress to and from any other State,' and should
enjoy in each State 'all the privileges of trade and commerce; subject to the
same duties, impositions, and restrictions, as the inhabitants thereof
respectively: provided, that such restrictions shall not extend so far as to
prevent the removal of property imported into any State, to any other State,
of which the owner is an inhabitant.' This article, then, _secured_ the right
of passing from one State to another, but gave no new right of commerce as to
the introduction of any goods, and not even the right of removing from the
State any property purchased in it. The rights of commerce, therefore, as
between the States, remained as before, subject to all the municipal laws of
the State, except that those laws must be general and impartial in their
application. Under the confederation, then, the States retained the whole
power of regulating foreign commerce, and that between the States, except as
stipulated in the treaty of confederation itself. Under it, all the trade and
intercourse between any State and any foreign nation, was carried on by the
law of nature and nations alone. All trade between any State and another
State, as to the right of importation, &c., was carried on in the same manner.
No State could make any freaty of commence with a foreign power, or with
another State.

113

The inconveniences resulting from these powers of the States, gave rise to the
new constitution. These inconveniences consisted principally in the
impositions and taxes levied on property imported and exported by one State
through another. There was no inconvenience as to the right of passing from
State to State, as that was secured by the articles of confederation. The
constitution applied the remedy to these evils in two ways: (1.) By express
prohibitions on the States, in those particulars in which the evils had been
most sensibly felt, preventing them from levying any impost or duty of
tonnage, without the consent of Congress. (2.) By vesting Congress with a
general power to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the States.
The constitution does not profess to give, in terms, the right of ingress and
regress for commercial or any other purposes, or the right of transporting
articles for trade from one State to another. It only protects the personal
rights of the citizens of one State, when within the jurisdiction of another,
by securing to them ' all the privileges and immunities of a citizen' of that
other, which they hold subject to the laws of the State as its own citizens;
and it protects their property against any duty to be imposed on its
introduction. The right, then, of intercourse with a State, by the subjects of
a foreign power, or by the citizens of another State, still rests on the
original right, as derived from the law of nations. Suppose there was no
treaty with a foreign power, and no act of Congress regulating intercourse
with that power, but barely a state of peace; that power would enjoy the right
of trade and intercourse with New-York, by the law of nations alone. But that
right might be restrained, or regulated, or abolished by the law of New-York
alone. Such was the situation of New-York before the adoption of the
constitution, both as to foreign nations and the other States. The
constitution has not abridged the power of the State in this respect. It has
only subjected it to the superior power of Congress when actually exercised.

114

An examination of the acts of Congress on this subject will show, that, as the
constitution has not given the right of intercourse and trade, so neither has
Congress, in the exercise of its constitutional powers, by any law, given that
right. Here the learned counsel entered into an elaborate examition of the
statutes, for the purpose of establishing this position.

115

It would seem to follow, from this view of the constitution and the acts of
Congress, that the right of transit from State to State, by land or water, for
commercial or other purposes, is founded on the _jus commune_ of nations; that
the constitution does not affect that right, except in specified cases; and as
to all others, leaves the right as before, with a general power in Congress to
regulate and control it, so far as it may be connected with commerce; that the
State has the concurrent power also, to regulate and control it, so far as it
may be connected with commerce; that the State has the concurrent power also,
to regulate and control it, in all cases where its regulations do not actually
conflict with those of Congress; that Congress has made no regulations, which
alter or affect the right at all, by giving any other right than was before
enjoyed; that all the regulations of the State, therefore, which operate
within its own limits, are binding upon all who come within its jurisdiction;
and that if Congress deems such regulations to be injurious, it may control
them by express provisions, operating directly upon the case.

116

The case has, heretofore, been considered as if the steam boat laws were
regulations of commerce among the States, in the ordinary acceptation of those
terms. But is the law in question any thing more than a regulation of the
internal navigation of the waters of the State? In terms, it applies only to
the waters within the State. It does not deny the right of entry into its
waters to any vessel navigated by steam: it only forbids such vessel, when
within its waters and jurisdiction, to be moved by steam; but that vessel may
still navigate by all other means; and it leaves the people of other States,
or of New-York, in the full possession of the right of navigation, by all the
means known or used at the time of the passage of the law. It is, therefore,
strictly a regulation of internal trade and navigation, which belongs to the
State. This may, indeed, indirectly affect the right of commercial intercourse
between the States. But so do all other laws regulating internal trade, or the
right of transit from one part to another of the same State; such as
quarantine laws, inspection laws, duties on auctions, licenses to sell goods,
&c. All these laws are acknowledged to be valid. They are passed, not with a
view or design to regulate commerce, but to promote some great object of
public interest, within the acknowledged scope of State legislation: such as
the public health, agriculture, revenue, or the encouragement of some public
improvement. Being passed for these legitimate objects, they are valid as
internal regulations, though they may incidentally restrict or regulate
foreign trade, or that between the States. So of the laws now in question;
they were passed to introduce and promote a great public improvement, clearly
within the power of the State to encourage. They operate entirely within the
limits of the State. They put no restraint on the right of entry into the
State; but they exclude from the right of navigation on its waters in a
particular mode, because they deem that mode injurious to the public interest,
unless used by particular persons. How can they be distinguished in principle,
from all the other laws which have been referred to? If steam boats had been
pernicious in themselves, or had been deemed so as affecting injuriously other
great public interests, could Congress have prohibited them on the waters of
New-York, by any exercise of the power to regulate commerce? Could not the
State have done it, by virtue of its general power, on its navigable waters?
Suppose that steam boats were found to be unsafe, and destructive to property
or lives, unless built or navigated by persons particularly skilful, could not
the State prohibit the use of them, unless thus built and navigated? If, under
any circumstances, the State may restrict the use of them to particular
persons, it may do so in its own discretion, for reasons of which it alone is
the judge.

117

All this shows that the restraint imposed by these laws, on the navigation of
the waters of the State, is merely an internal regulation of the right of
transit, or passage from one part of the State to another; that it is a
regulation which, if even indispensable to the public safety, Congress could
not make; and that the power to make it must, therefore, be in the State.

118

The right of a State to regulate its internal trade, applies as well to its
navigable waters, as to its other territory. Its rivers are its territory and
domain, as much as the land, and equally subject to its laws in all respects.
The power of Congress to regulate commerce applies as well to the land as to
the water. Commerce between the States, and with foreign powers, is very
extensively carried on by land. Congress has accordingly adapted its revenue
laws to the land, by imposing duties on goods imported in carriages, &c. When
goods are brought into the State in a carriage or wagon, cannot the State
prohibit the transportation of those goods from one part of the State to
another, except in a particular manner, or by a particular road, or in
vehicles of a particular description? Where is the difference between an
exclusive right to navigate vessels by steam on the water, and an exclusive
right to move carriages by steam on the land? Cannot a State grant an
exclusive privilege to carry goods as well as passengers, in carriages or
vessels, by water or by land? May it not convert all its roads leading into
other States, into turnpikes, levy tolls upon them, and alter and abolish them
at pleasure? All these are regulations of the internal trade of the State, but
they may, and, indeed, must affect, to a great degree, the trade between the
States. By virtue of the right of a State over its navigable waters, it
establishes _ferries_ , which are exclusive rights to use parts of navigable
waters for particular purposes and in a particular manner; and _bridges_ ,
which interrupt, and sometimes destroy the navigation of rivers: It grants the
land under the water at pleasure, builds public piers, erects dams and other
obstructions, and diverts the course of the waters for any purpose whatsoever.
By its power over its land territory, a State establishes roads and canals,
regulates the carrying of goods, and the amount of tolls upon them, grants
exclusive privileges to stage wagons and others, for the carriage of goods and
passengers, and performs all other acts of sovereignty in regard to these
public highways.

119

It appears, then, that a State may exercise the same control in these
respects, over both land and water, within its own jurisdiction; that the
right, as to both, rests on the same foundation, that of a sovereign over his
domain; and that it has uniformly been exercised over both in the same manner.
What, then, is the right under which the respondent claims? It is only an
internal regulation of the use of the waters of the State. This is clearly the
case, when it applies to the case of the conveyance of passengers or goods, on
the waters of the State, where the whole journey or transit is within the
State, as from New-York to Albany. Is it in truth any thing more than an
exclusive right of ferry over the waters of Hudson's river? It is, in
substance and effect, an exclusive right to carry pasengers in boats navigated
in a particular mode, on the navigable waters of the State. These waters are a
public highway, like any other public road on land, and, as such, are
completely subject to the control of the State laws. There are various acts of
Congress which recognise the power of the States to control their navigable
waters. Thus, in the act enabling the people of Louisiana to form a
constitution, there is a provision, that the State convention _shall 'pass an
ordinance providing_ that the river Mississippi, and the navigable rivers and
waters leading into the same, or into the gulf of Mexico, _shall be common
highways_ , and for ever free, as well to the inhabitants of the said State,
as to other citizens of the United States, without any tax, duty, impost, or
toll therefor, imposed by the said State.'5 And in the act for the admission
of that State, the above provisions, as to the navigation of the Mississippi,
are made one of the fundamental conditions of the admission.6 Similar
conditions were also imposed upon the admission of the States of Mississippi,
Missouri, and Alabama;7 which strongly imply, that the new States would have
had a right to control the navigation of their waters, if these provisions had
not been inserted; that there is nothing in the constitution which could
prevent them from doing so, when they should once have been admitted as equal
members of the Union; and that Congress could pass no law, under the
constitution, to prevent them from doing it.

120

But the power of Congress is 'to regulate _commerce_.' The correct definition
of _commerce_ is, the transportation and sale of commodities. It is so
considered in all the regulations made by the laws of Congress. They speak
generally of vessels and their cargoes, and whatever rights are given by the
laws of Congress, apply to commerce strictly and properly speaking. Any person
claiming to navigate the waters of the State of New-York against the State
laws, under any right derived from the laws of Congress relative to commerce,
must show himself qualified according to these laws, and actually exercising
that right under their provisions. Now, if the license here set up gives any
right it is to carry on the coasting trade, which consists in transporting
goods from one State to another. It is not pretended that the appellant was
engaged in this trade, when stopped by the injunction. It appears by the
pleadings, that his boat was employed in the transportation of persons or
passengers for hire, and it is notorious that this is a distinct business. It
is often entirely disconnected from any commercial object, though sometimes
indirectly connected with trade. So it has been considered by some of the
States. New-York once laid a tax upon passengers travelling in the steam
boats; and Delaware taxed passengers travelling through that State in
carriages. But these States could have laid no tax on _property_ thus
transported. If, then, the appellant's boat was engaged, _bona fide_ , in the
coasting trade, the question might arise as to its rights and privileges under
the enrolment and license. But, when no trade is carried on, or intended to be
carried on, under the license, it is clear that the license is a fraud upon
the State law, if that law is in other respects valid. An examination of the
provisions of the statutes relating to the coasting trade will show, that they
all relate exclusively to the coasting trade as before defined, and do not
contemplate the carrying of passengers as distinguished from commerce. Every
vessel engaged in it, must not only have a license, but must comply with
various regulations, at every departure she takes from one district to
another; and, unless it is shown that such regulations have been complied
with, the vessel can claim no right (in any case) to navigate under the laws
of the United States. It does not appear that the appellant's boat has ever
done this, or pretended to do it, or, in fact, to be engaged in trade at all.

121

It has thus been attempted to be shown, that our exclusive right is valid,
even if the law granting it is to be considered as a regulation or restriction
of the right of commercial intercourse between the States, on the ground, (1.)
That the power to regulate commerce is strictly a concurrent power. (2.) That
the State may act in any manner, in the exercise of that power, so long as its
laws do not interfere with any right exercised under the constitution or laws
of the United States. (3.) That the appellant, in this case, has shown no
right under that constitution or these laws, and, therefore, cannot contest
the validity of the exclusive grant. (4.) That even if the enrolment and
license relied on, give a right, it is not the right of intercourse for any
other purpose than for the coasting trade; and the appellant does not show
that he was carrying on, or intended to carry on, that trade. But that the
State law, in fact, is only a regulation of the internal trade and right of
navigation, within the territorial limits of the State: that the power to
regulate this, is exclusively in the State; that the State has exercised it,
in the same manner, both by land and water; and that the law is valid,
although incidentally it may affect the right of intercourse between the
States.

122

To which it may be added, that the State law may be valid in part, or as
enforced under particular circumstances, though it may be void under other
circumstances. Thus, the law may be held void, so far as it restrains the
right of navigation between State and State, either for commercial purposes,
strictly speaking, or for all purposes, including the transportation of
passengers. And it may, at the same time, be valid, so far as it restrains the
right of internal navigation, strictly speaking, either in the whole extent of
the right, or as a mere exclusive right to carry passengers in steam boats.
Thus, the State law may be suffered to operate, in whole or in part, so far as
it may, without actual conflict with the constitution or laws of the United
States.

123

Mr. _Emmett_ , on the same side, stated, that the question sought to be
presented, was the complete invalidity of these laws of New-York, as being
repugnant to the constitution of the United States. If the invalidity be not
total and absolute, (and that might well be the case with statutes, which are
often void in part, and good for the residue,) the appellant must further
show, that _he himself_ stands in that situation, which entitles him to allege
their partial invalidity; that _his_ case is such, as that the part of the law
which is void, is calculated, if enforced, to affect or injure his rights.

124

In addition to the general _prima facie_ presumption in favour of the
constitutionality of every act of a State Legislature, this series of laws
derives a peculiar claim to that presumption, from the history of the
circumstances attendant on their enactment. On the 19th of March, 1787, a
short time before the meeting of the federal convention, the Legislature of
the State of New-York made its grant to John Fitch, for 14 years. From
motives, of the correctness of which this Court can take no cognizance, the
Legislature, on the 27th of March, 1798, thought fit to repeal that law, on
the suggestion that Fitch was either dead, or had withdrawn himself, and that
Robert R. Livingston was possessed of a mode of applying the steam engine to
propel boats, &c. At this time, all the laws of Congress regulating commerce
and patents, had been for above five years in operation, and their provisions
familiarly known. The Council of Revision, consisting of Mr. Jay, as Governor,
Chief Justice Lansing, Judge Lewis, and Judge Benson, notwithstanding the
personal regard they might well be supposed to have entertained for Chancellor
Livingston, (who was also a member, but did not sit,) thought it their duty to
object to this bill, on the ground that the facts from which Fitch's
forfeiture was to arise, had not been found by some due course of law. The
act, however, passed the Legislature by a constitutional majority. But he
would here ask, _who_ made this objection, and what were the inferences it
afforded, as to the constitutionality of the law? Mr. Jay's is a name of
peculiar authority; Chief Justice Lansing had been a member of the federal
convention; and both the Judges were perfectly conversant with the political
proceedings of the day. They were adverse to this act on principle, and must
be presumed to have presented all the objections against it which they thought
well founded. They not only did not think that the adoption of the
constitution, and the enacting by Congress of her revenue and patent laws, had
made Fitch's privileges cease, but neither the constitution nor those laws
appeared to furnish any objection against a similar grant to Robert R.
Livingston. On the 29th of March, 1799, an act was passed, extending the
former act for twenty years from its date, and giving two years for making the
experiment. That passed the Council of Revision without any objection, none of
the judges having dreamt that it was unconstitutional. The time for making the
experiment having run out, without a boat having been made, and Mr. Fulton
having associated himself to Mr. Livingston in the investigation, on the 5th
of April, 1803, the Legislature made the grant anew to Messrs. Livingston and
Fulton. And that law was again approved of by the Council of Revision,
consisting almost entirely of new members, and differing from the first. The
time granted by this law for constructing a boat, again ran out; and on the
6th of April, 1807, it was again extended for two years, and that act also
approved of by the Council of Revision. In the course of that year, the
experiment was successfully made; and on the 11th of April, 1808, the
Legislature, by an act, which also passed the Council of Revision, _made a
contract_ with Messrs. Livingston and Fulton, by which they hoped to gain, and
did gain, unequalled accommodations for persoss travelling in the State.

125

The success of those gentlemen awoke the cupidity of others, and doubts of the
constitutionality of those laws were, for the first time, raised. But, after
these questions were first broached, and while opposition boats were actually
building, on the 9th of April, 1811, the Legislature passed another act, which
also received the sanction of the Council of Revision. These were not judicial
decisions; but they were six consecutive and deliberative acts of Judges,
equally bound, by their duty and oath of office, to examine, decide, and act
upon this objection, if it had sufficient force; they so nearly resembled
judicial decisions, that they might well be cited as authorities. They also
showed, that the laws now objected to had not grown out of any temporary
effervescence, or excitement, or party intrigues. The grant began in 1798, and
had been universally ratified down to 1811.

126

But the constitutionality of those laws had been the subject of a judicial
decision of the most respectable character. The act of 1811 had a proviso,
that nothing therein contained should extend to the three opposition boats
actually built and launched. With regard to two of them, Livingston and Fulton
filed a bill for an injunction to prevent their navigating. The then
Chancellor thought the question too important to grant an injunction, in the
first instance, and refused it; from that decision an appeal was made to the
Court of Errors of that State; there the constitutionality of those laws was
very ably disputed, but supported by the unanimous decree of that Court, and
the very elaborate opinions of the Judges, which, for sound constitutional
reasoning, can scarcely be surpassed.8

127

New-York is not the only State which has passed such laws. Massachusetts,
February 7, 1815, granted to J. L. Sullivan, a similar grant for steam tow-
boats, on Connecticut river, for twenty-eight years, after the expiration of
his patent, which, on February 11, 1819, was enlarged for two years. New-
Hampshire, in June, 1816, gave him a similar privilege on the Merrimack.
Pennsylvania, on the 26th of March, 1813, gave a similar right to James
Barnes, from Wilksbarre to Tioga Point, the borders of our State. Georgia, on
the 14th November, 1814, gave a similar right to S. Howard, for all the waters
of the State, with steam tow-boats; and by another act, 19th December, 1817,
granted to a company, (probably deriving under Howard,) a similar right for
steam boats for twenty years. Tennessee has lately given a similar right on
the Tennessee river.

128

What are the provisions of the constitution alleged against the validity of
those laws? They are to be found in the powers given to Congress, art. 1. s.
8. to regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several States,
and with the Indian tribes; and, also, to promote the progress of science and
of the useful arts, by securing, for limited times, to authors and inventors,
the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries.

129

If the constitution had not contained either of the provisions referred to,
the right of the States to grant exclusive privileges would be unquestionable.
At any rate, no point could be presented to this Court, by which it could have
jurisdiction to consider the validity of their grants. In free countries,
which reject the pretensions of prerogative, it is (unless constitutionally
forbidden) a part of the right of legislation; and whether wisely exercised or
not, is a question between the government and the people, with which this
Court have nothing to do.9 Those are the only provisions on the subject; for
it is clear, that the 2d sec. of the 4th art. (which, however, has sometimes
been mentioned,) would not have prevented the exercise of this right: That is
only intended to secure to all citizens of the United States, when coming into
any State, the same immunities and privileges that are enjoyed by the citizens
of that State, and subject to the same laws and regulations; and,
unquestionably, those laws do not place the citizens of other States on a
different footing than the citizens of the State of New-York.

130

Those provisions, before specified, cannot apply to interfere with the State
laws, unless where a case is presented, the facts of which bring it within one
or other of those provisions.10 Now, the case presented contains nothing to
make either of the provisions of the constitution applicable to it. Certainly
_no patent_ is here presented touching the same subject matter, and with which
the State grants are pretended to interfere. On this point the appellant has
no right to ask for the decision of this Court, or to claim the benefit of its
jurisdiction.

131

Neither does the case present any ground on which the application of the
clause respecting commerce can be made; the vessels not having been engaged in
trade or commerce, but in carrying passengers for hire. But if either of those
provisions can be applicable, what is the general rule for their construction,
as to the extent and conclusiveness of the powers they confer? In the
delegation of authority to Congress itself by the constitution, the
phraseology does not imply exclusive power. It is remarkable, that even the
definite article _the_ is omitted, and it is only provided that Congress shall
_have power_ , &c. And this omission was not accidental, but studiously made.
By referring to the journals of the Federal Convention,11 it will be found,
that the sixth article of Mr. Charles Pinkney's draft has the words 'shall
have _the_ power,' &c. In the draft reported by the committee of five, (art.
7th,) the definite article is still preserved.12 In the draft as reported by
Mr. Brearly, the word 'the' is left out, clearly by design.13 Notwithstanding
that, Mr. Patrick Henry and Mr. George Mason, and, indeed, the opposers of the
constitution generally, thought, that by that instrument, as originally
presented to the people, all the powers given to Congress would be considered
as given to them exclusively of the States.14 Mr. Henry said, 'the right
interpretation of the delegation of those powers was, that when power was
given, it was exclusively given.' And Mr. George Mason15 asks, 'will powers
remain to the States, which are not expressly guarded and reserved?' This
construction, which was the general foundation of the opposition to the
constitution, was strenously disavowed and reasoned against in the
_Federalist_ ,16 and actually produced the 10th article of the amendment. The
same doctrine was, nevertheless, maintained by one of the counsel in the case
of _Sturges v. Crowninshield_.17 He says, 'every power given to the
constitution, unless limited, is entire, exclusive and supreme.' But the Court
held differently; that the grant of a power to Congress does not imply a
prohibition on a State to exercise the same right.18 And the doctrine is very
fully enlarged upon by Mr. Justice Story, in _Houston v. Moore_.19 It is also
very clearly laid down in the case already cited, by Thompson, J. and by Kent,
Ch. J.20 But the rule is more strongly, and perhaps not less justly, laid down
by Judge Tucker, in his edition of _Blackstone's Commentaries;_21 after
alluding to the clauses restraining the powers given, he says, 'the sum of all
which appears to be, that the powers delegated to the federal government are,
in all cases, to receive the most strict construction that the instrument will
bear, where the rights of a State, or of the people, either collectively or
individually, may be drawn in question.' This rule of construction must be
correct; for _the constitution gives nothing to the States or to the people_.
Their rights existed before it was formed, and are derived from the nature of
sovereignty and the principles of freedom. The constitution _gives_ only to
the general government, and so far as it operates on State or popular rights,
it takes away a portion, which it gives to the general government. In respect
to _extent and range_ , this delegation of powers ought, perhaps, to be
liberally construed; but the States or the people must not be thereby excluded
from the exercise of any part of the sovereign or popular rights held by them
before the adoption of the constitution, except where that instrument has
given it exclusively to the general government. The 10th amendment of the
constitution was adopted to secure that construction, and it is conformable to
the rules of reason and law, in construing every similar instrument. The truth
of this rule has, however, been sometimes controverted, by referring to the
power of naturalization as exclusive, and reasoning from that to the others.
Naturalization is decided by this Court to be an exclusive power; but it must
be so considered, not from the grant of it in the 7th article, but from the
force and necessary effect of the 2d sec. of the 4th article. It is,
therefore, an exception, and does not shake the general rule.

132

It is of very little importance, whether the power to regulate commerce be
_exclusive_ or _concurrent_ since this State grant does not, in fact,
interfere with any congressional regulation of commerce. But as the exclusive
nature of that power has been always insisted on, and used as an argument
against this grant, it may be right to consider the solidity of the assertion.

133

The expression, _concurrent powers_ , is objected to, as if it implied
equality in the rights vested in Congress and the States. It is only a verbal
criticism, that it would be more correct if the term used was _co-ordinate_.
The term, concurrent, is adopted by the _Federalist_ , and has constantly been
used to express those powers. It is always understood, when so applied, that
the exercise by the States must be subordinate, and never can be in collision
with that by Congress. It has been said, _commerce is an unit;_ the meaning of
that expression does not very clearly appear, nor its force and application to
the argument. If it be an unit, the constitution has broken it into fractions,
and given to the States the exclusive control of one of the fractions. But
further, the _regulations_ relating to that unit, are many and various: some
acting on one part, and some on another, and operating on it in different
ways. It is with these regulations, that this discussion has to do; and the
question still remains, whether some of those regulations may not,
subordinately, emanate from the States.

134

As Congress has no power to regulate the internal commerce of any State, none
of its regulations can affect so much of the exclusive grant, as restrains
vessels which are only used within the States; nor can it give to any man a
permission to carry on any steam boat navigation, which, in its beginning, and
ending, and course, is entirely confined within the waters of the State: for
instance, between New-York and Albany; on Cayuga lake; on lake Ontario, and
the St. Lawrence, from Niagara to Ogdensburg. The only questions can be, as to
navigation between foreign countries, or another State and New-York; and even
there, the power of Congress could only be extended to fair cases of _trading_
, within the purview of the constitution, and not to the mere transportation
of passengers; nor to any colourable pretence of trading, as a cover for
carrying passengers, and defeating the grant. This distinction is, in itself,
of great consequence, and peculiarly applicable to the case before the Court,
in which the complainant states, and the defendant admits, the vessels to have
been employed in the transportation of passengers. The power given to Congress
to regulate commerce with foreign nations, and between the several States,
relates to commerce, in the proper acceptation of the term; 'the exchange of
one thing for another; the interchange of commodities; trade or traffic.' This
is the direct subject of the power; and by force of the auxiliary power, 'to
make all laws which shall be necessary for carrying into execution the
foregoing powers,' Congress has passed laws for erecting ports of entry and
delivery, for the collection of duties, regulation of seamen and ships
employed in foreign commerce, or that between the States. Ports, duties,
seamen and ships, afford the means of regulating commerce, and therefore, so
far as they are used in such commerce, they come within the powers of
Congress. It has an incidental power, indeed, to regulate _navigation_ , but
only so far as that navigation is, or may be, subservient to the commerce it
has a direct power to regulate. It has no right to interfere with the
navigation of the navigable waters of any State, or even where they are common
to two States, except so far as that navigation is used for, or applicable to,
the purposes of the commerce it has the power to regulate; and it is a
proposition unequivocally false, when asserted generally, that Congress has
power to interfere with or regulate the navigation of the navigable waters of
any State or States. The proposition can only be made true, by adding the
qualification, 'in so far as that navigation is used in foreign commerce, or
commerce between the States.' It is contended, that the navigable waters
belong peculiarly to the Federal government, and not to the States within
which they are. This position, combined with some others, made by the
appellant's counsel, leads to alarming results. We have canals of which we are
proud, and from their tolls the State anticipates large profits; one is laying
out from Sharon, in Connecticut, to the Hudson; and another contemplated
through New-Jersey, from the Delaware to the Hudson. Those already in
operation, run from navigable waters to navigable waters; from lake Erie or
Champlain to the Hudson: those projected, are to be from one State to another.
Their utility and profits must result from transporting the produce of Canada,
or other States, to New-York, principally for exportation and foreign trade;
and bearing back, in return, the products of foreign commerce to those places.
They are, then, instruments of foreign commerce, and of that among the States;
and mere channels of communication between navigable waters, or different
States. Now, where a power is given to Congress, all the means which are
appropriate and plainly adapted to the execution of that power, are also
given.22 It is contended, that it belongs exclusively to Congress to regulate
the navigation and vessels that are the medium of foreign trade, and that
between the States; this commerce is an unit, and cannot be divided; the
navigable waters belong to the general government, and not to the States; no
State has a right to collect revenue from foreign trade, or that between the
States. If these positions be considered together, what becomes of the State
control over our canals, the craft on them, or the tolls from them? the pier
at Black Rock, or the basin at Albany? If the power of Congress over commerce
be exclusive, it must also have exclusive control over the means of carrying
it on. No State, then, should be mad enough to make another canal, susceptible
of being used for intercourse between the States, or foreign commerce.

135

But there is no grant in the constitution giving the navigable waters
peculiarly to the Federal government, and not to the States within which they
may be; nor is it traced to any grant, but to some mystical consequence of the
Union itself. The position is entirely denied, and met by another, of which
the strictest examination is solicited. It is this: _the Federal government
can do no act on the navigable waters within the limits of the United States,
which, or a corresponding act to which, it cannot do on the land, within the
same limits_. If it can, let the act be named. Then the navigable waters
belong no more to the Federal government, and are no otherwise affected by the
Union, than the land itself. Both are equally subject to the jurisdiction of
the general government, for the exercise of all powers delegated to it by the
constitution, and both equally subject to State jurisdiction, for the exercise
of all powers connected with State sovereignty. It is said, that admiralty and
maritime jurisdiction belong exclusively to the Federal government; but this
Court has decided, that the grant to the United States in the constitution, of
all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction, does not extend to a cession
of the waters in which those cases may arise, or of general jurisdiction over
the same; and that the general jurisdiction over the place, subject to this
grant, adheres to the territory as a portion not yet given away; and that the
residuary powers of legislation still remain in the State.23 Besides,
admiralty and maritime jurisdiction depends either on the place where the act
is done, or the nature of the act itself. The place gives no jurisdiction,
where the navigable waters in which the tide ebbs and flows are within the
body of a county or a State, or of two States.24 Accordingly, the laws giving
jurisdiction of crimes to the District and Circuit Courts, confine it to
'places out of the jurisdiction of any particular State.' If the Admiralty
Court has cognisance of any matter done on navigable waters within a State, it
is derived, not from the _locus_ , but from the _causa litis_ , which gives
jurisdiction, though it should arise on land: for instance, seamen's wages,
founded on shipping articles made on land, have always, and charter parties
and policies of insurance, have lately, been held to be of admiralty
jurisdiction.25

136

But, it is further said, to prove the exclusive control of the general
government over those navigable waters, that they are regarded and treated as
the high seas, since this admiralty and maritime jurisdiction includes 'all
seizures under laws of impost, navigation or trade of the United States, where
the seizures are made on waters which are navigable from the sea by vessels of
ten or more tons burthen, within their respective districts, as well as upon
the high seas.' The seizures alluded to, are for breaches of commercial laws,
coming under the constitutional powers of Congress, and the authority of the
United States over the place, on that account, is equal, whether the offence
be committed on land or water; and the very next sentence gives to the same
District Court 'exclusive original cognisance of all seizures on land, or
other waters, than as aforesaid made.' In fact, analogous provisions for
regulating foreign commerce by land, are made by the act of the 2d of March,
1821, 'further to regulate the entry of merchandise imported into the United
States from any adjacent territory.' It directs every conductor of any
carriage or sleigh, and every other person coming from any adjacent foreign
territory into the United States, with merchandise subject to duty,
immediately on arrival within the United States, to deliver a manifest, &c. at
the office of the nearest Collector, or Deputy Collector, to be verified on
oath; for noncompliance, the carriage or sleigh shall be forfeited. The duties
to be paid or secured by bonds; and all penalties and forfeitures to be sued
for and recovered in the manner prescribed by the general collection law.
Clearly, then, Congress has no more power over the navigable waters, than over
the land; nor over the ships, than it has over the carriages and sleights
engaged in the same kind of commerce. It might register, enrol and license the
latter, if it thought fit, as well as ships. Nor is there any greater control
acquired by the general government, in virtue of the existence of the Union,
over navigable waters or shipping, than over land and land carriages. The
power it possesses as to ships or vessels, is only in so far as they are
instruments of foreign commerce, or of that between the different States; but
in so far as the employment of a ship or vessel in navigating the waters of
any State or States, has no connexion with the commerce which Congress has
power to regulate; neither that employment, nor its regulation or prohibition,
falls within the purview of the federal constitution. It could not, I think,
be seriously contended, that Congress can regulate the carrying of passengers
from any part of the Union, who are travelling to Balston, Saratoga, or any
other place, for health or pleasure; and even if the object of their passing
were to trade, that would not legalize the interference of Congress as to the
mode of their conveyance from place to place. That naturally falls within the
sphere of State legislation; and we must keep in memory the rule of
construction laid down by Judge Tucker, and already cited, 'that the powers
delegated to the federal government are, in all cases, to receive the most
strict construction that the instrument will bear, where the rights of a State
or of the people, either collectively or individually, may be drawn in
question.' Those who contend, that navigating by steam boats between different
States, falls within the powers of Congress, must admit that it would have the
power to prohibit the carrying of goods, wares or merchandise in a steam boat
from any foreign place, or different State, to another. Now, would Congress
have the power to prohibit the carrying of passengers in steam boats from
Norfolk or Elizabethtown Point to New-York? Certainly such a power could not
be contended for; and why not? only because the powers of Congress have
nothing to say to the carrying of passengers.

137

It may be urged against this train of reasoning, that Congress has actually
legislated on the subject of passengers. By the act of the 2d of March, 1819,
regulating passenger ships and vessels, the fact is admitted; but, though the
humane motives which suggested the law; and its provisions, are laudable, its
constitutionality may well be doubted. If Congress has the power to regulate
the conveyance of mere passengers, coming by water from foreign countries, it
has an equal power to regulate those coming by land, or passing from one State
to another. If that law be constitutional, or if a steam boat, only employed
in carrying passengers between New-Jersey and New-York, can come within the
jurisdiction of Congress, it must necessarily follow, that Congress has a
right (and, indeed, according to the doctrine of our adversaries, is
exclusively authorized,) to regulate the number of passengers to be received
into every ordinary stage coach, though it does not carry the mail, and the
size, shape, description, and kind of diligence, and the kind and number of
horses, to be employed in conveying passengers between New-Brunswick and
Maine, Vermont and New-York, and through the State of New-Jersey, between New-
York and Philadelphia! If this legislation falls under the power to regulate
commerce, and that power is exclusive, it must be contended, that none of the
States in which these diligences may travel, have a right to pass any law
respecting them! Neither this Court, nor the people of the United States, are,
probably, prepared for the assertion of that claim. The States have always
legislated on a different principle, whether the conveyance of passengers was
to be by land or water. Every State has, probably, made numerous provisions on
this subject; but, want of time and opportunity has confined research to the
statutes of New-York and Georgia.26

138

It is, however, contended, that the power of regulating commerce is
_concurrent_. This position, indeed, is by no means universally acceded to.
Judge Tucker, in his edition of _Blackstone_ ,27 ranks among the powers
exclusively granted to the federal government, the power to regulate commerce,
&c. the commerce between the individuals of the same State being reserved to
the State governments. And he repeats the doctrine,28 on the very untenable
ground, that the regulation of commerce is not susceptible of a concurrent
exercise: a doctrine which a review of State laws will show to be contrary to
fact and experience. The opposite doctrine is strongly supported by Kent, Ch.
J. in Livingston v. Van Ingen,29 as the only safe and practicable rule of
conduct, and the true constitutional rule, arising from the federal system.
And it is the only safe and practicable rule; it is one which the extent of
our territory would indicate, even if the government were despotic. In China,
the Mandarins of provinces must be intrusted with some subordinate authority,
to make commercial regulations adapted to local circumstances. With us, the
peculiar nature and principles of our free and federative government, make the
existence of such subordinate legislation more prudent and politic. There must
be, even in respect to foreign commerce, local interests and details, which
cannot well be presented to the view of Congress, and can be, at least, better
provided for by the State Legislatures, emanating from the very people to whom
they relate. This must have been perceived by the framers of the constitution,
and they must have felt the difficulty of designating the limits of what ought
to be permitted to State authority. They did not, therefore, attempt the
limitation, except in some plain cases, which they marked by restrictions and
prohibitions; but they guarded against any practical abuse of the permission,
by securing to Congress the paramount and controlling power over the whole
matter. This view of the subject is exceedingly strengthened, when we
contemplate the probable future increase and extent of this confederacy. The
thirteen original States were a band of brothers, who suffered, fought, bled,
and triumphed together; they might, perhaps, have safely confided each his
separate interest to the general will; but if ever the day should come, when
representatives from beyond the Rocky Mountains shall sit in this capitol; if
ever a numerous and inland delegation shall wield the exclusive power of
making regulations for our foreign commerce, without community of interest or
knowledge of our local circumstances, the Union will not stand; it cannot
stand; it cannot be the ordinance of God or nature, that it should stand. It
has been said by very high authority, that the power of Congress to regulate
commerce, 'sweeps away the whole subject matter.' If so, it makes a wreck of
State legislation, leaving only a few standing ruins, that mark the extent of
the desolation. The position, however, is not correct. A power of regulating
commerce is impliedly acknowledged to be in the States, by the 10th section of
the 1st article; for that section makes specific limitations on its exercise
by them, which would be unnecessary, if the power were not possessed by them;
and tacitly admits (what is true as to all the State powers) that it is
possessed in all other matters not expressly restrained. Congress can lay no
tax or duty on any articles exported from any State. If the word _exports_
were not in the 10th section, what would be the consequence? that the States,
and they only, could lay duties on exports; and as it is, what is the
construction? that, although Congress can, under no circumstances, impose a
duty on exports, any State can, with the consent of Congress, to any amount;
and without asking the consent of Congress, to an amount and extent necessary
for executing its inspection laws; possessing, in that respect, a power of
regulating external commerce, which is directly withheld from Congress. And
from whence is derived the power _to make_ inspection laws, but from the
existing and more extensive right of making laws to regulate commerce? It
seems, also, that the 9th section of the same article, paragraph 1, in like
manner, admits the power to be in the States. The _importation_ of slaves is,
and has always been, considered as a branch of commerce; and it is in that
point of view only, that Congress has authority to legislate on the subject.
When, then, that paragraph speaks of any of the States thinking proper to
allow that importation, it surely admits in them a right to permit or
prohibit; and thus to legislate on what is undoubtedly a branch of commerce
with foreign nations, or among the several States.

139

Indeed, it seems susceptible of demonstration, that Congress did not intend to
ask, nor the States to give to that body, the exclusive power of regulating
foreign commerce, or that between the States. In Colvin's edition of the Laws
of the United States,30 we find the proceedings, which led to the formation of
the General Convention. The appellant's counsel has selected, as one of these,
the representation from New-Jersey, to be found in pages 22, 23. art. 2d. But
that can scarcely be said to have led to the convention. It was made in 1778,
during the revolutionary war, and to meet objectionable parts of the old
articles of confederation. At any rate, it appears from page 25, that the
proposed alterations were rejected in Congress. In 1781,31 Mr. Witherspoon
proposed in Congress a modified change of the power of regulating commerce,
which was also negatived. None of the other States made any proposition
similar to that from New-Jersey, in 1778. The following, more nearly
approaching the time of the convention, better shows the extent of what
Congress asked, and the States appeared willing to concede.32 'In Congress,
Wednesday, July 13th, 1785. The committee, consisting of Mr. Monroe, Mr.
Spaight, Mr. Houston, Mr. Johnson, and Mr. King, to whom was referred the
motion of Mr. Monroe, submit the following report: 'That the 1st paragraph of
the 9th of the articles of confederation, be altered, so as to read thus, viz.
The United States in Congress assembled, shall have the sole and exclusive
right and power of determining on peace or war, except in cases mentioned in
the 6th article; of sending and receiving ambassadors; entering into treaties
and alliances; of regulating the trade of the States, as well with foreign
nations as with each other; and of laying such imposts and duties upon imports
and exports, as may be necessary for the purpose. _Provided_ , that the
citizens of the States shall, in no instance, be subjected to pay higher
imposts or duties than those imposed on the subjects of foreign powers.
_Provided_ also, _that the legislature power of the several States, shall not
be restrained from prohibiting the importation or exportation of any species
of goods or commodities whatsoever_." This is what the Congress itself asked
for and required. The State of Virginia was among the first to meet its views;
and Mr. Madison, in the Legislature of that State, proposed a resolution,
which will be found in the same book,33 as follows:

140

'Virginia, to wit: In the House of Delegates, Wednesday, November 30th, 1785.'

141

[Mr. Madison's resolution for empowering Congress to regulate trade.]

142

'Mr. Alexander White reported, according to order, a resolution agreed to by
the committee of the whole house, on Monday last, respecting commerce,' &c.

143

'Whereas the relative situation of the United States has been found, on trial,
to require uniformity in their commercial regulations, as the only effectual
policy for obtaining, in the ports of foreign nations, a stipulation of
privileges reciprocal to those enjoyed by the subjects of such nations in the
ports of the United States; for preventing animosities, which cannot fail to
arise among the several States, from the interference of partial and separate
regulations; and whereas such uniformity can be best concerted and carried
into effect by the federal councils, which, having been instituted for the
purpose of managing the interests of the States, in cases which cannot so well
be provided for by measures individually pursued, ought to be invested with
authority in this case, as being within the reason and policy of their
institution: 'Resolved, That it is the opinion of this committee, that the
delegates representing this Commonwealth in Congress, be instructed to propose
in Congress a recommendation to the States in the Union, to authorize that
assembly to regulate their trade on the following principles, and under the
following qualifications: 1st. Giving power to Congress to prohibit foreign
vessels from entering any port, or to impose duties on them and their cargoes;
such duties to be uniform, and carried into the treasury of the State. 2d.
That no State be at liberty to impose duties on any goods, wares, or
merchandise imported, by land or by water, _from any other State; but may
altogether prohibit the importation from any State, of any particular species
or description of goods, wares or merchandise, of which the importation is, at
the same time, prohibited from all other places whatsoever_.' In each of those
proceedings, it was clearly contemplated, that the individual States should at
least retain the power of _absolutely prohibiting_ the importation of any
article they thought fit, within their own respective limits. How far was this
intention subsequently departed from? Where is the power of prohibiting the
exportation or importation of any article taken from the States by the
constitution? They are indeed qualifiedly restrained from laying imposts or
duties on exports or imports, but not from entirely prohibiting their
exportation or importation; and they are also restrained from laying any duty
on tonnage; and it is, perhaps, the fair construction of the instrument, that
even their prohibitory legislation, is under the control of Congress, as
having the paramount authority to regulate commerce; but valid until Congress
shall have made regulations inconsistent with their laws. A review of some of
the laws of different States, will show that they have always exercised the
power of making very material regulations respecting commerce. This review
must be abridged; but it is of extreme importance, and if it were possible to
spread out in detail the immense mass of State laws, regulating and affecting
foreign commerce, and that among the States, it would be conclusively seen,
that they have always considered themselves as possessing, and have,
accordingly, exercised a _concurrent_ power over both those branches of trade;
and that the power of Congress cannot be decided to be exclusive, without
declaring to be unconstitutional, an appalling body of State legislation.

144

To begin with the laws respecting slaves. The appellant's counsel has
questioned their constitutionality, and called them of doubtful authority.
That expression showed he felt their application and important bearing, if
their constitationality be admitted; and it has never before been called in
question. The constitution most clearly admits the right of the States to
legislate on this subject, not merely till 1808, but always, unless Congress
should prohibit the trade; and yet, as has been already suggested, slaves are
treated in that they paragraph itself, as an article of commerce or trade.
Congress, renouncing for a time the paramount right to prohibit their
importation, claims the right to lay a tax or duty on it. So also, they are
treated as an article of commerce in the _laws_ of Congress; for it is only
under the power to regulate foreign commerce, that, before 1808, _they_ could
forbid and make penal, the trade by our citizens to foreign nations, and since
1808, prohibit it entirely. In this point of view it was also considered, and
the right of the States to prohibit it asserted, in the debates of the
Virginia convention. On this article Mr. George Mason observed, 'should the
government be amended, still this detestable _kind of commerce_ cannot be
discontinued till after the expiration of twenty years.'34 To which Mr.
Madison, in reply, says,35 ' _We_ are not in a worse situation than before.
_That traffic is prohibited by our laws, and we may continue the prohibition.
The Union_ , in general, is not in a worse situation. Under the articles of
the confederation, it might be continued for ever.' And again,36 'as to the
restriction in the clause under consideration, it was a restraint on the
exercise of a power expressly delegated to Congress, _namely, that of
regulating commerce with foreign nations_.' Mr. George Nicholas also, alluding
to both objections, says,37 'Virginia might continue the prohibition of such
importation during the intermediate period.' And to obviate the objection,
that the restriction of Congress was a proof that they would have power not
given to them, he remarked, 'that they would only have had a general
superintendency _of trade_ , if the restriction had not been inserted. But the
southern States insisted on this exception to that general superintendency for
twenty years. It could not, therefore, have been a power by implication, as
the restriction was an exception to a delegated power.' And, finally, Governor
Randolph says,38 ' _the power respecting the importation of negroes, is an
exception from the power given to Congress to regulate commerce_.' The same
doctrine is also maintained in the _Federalist_.39 Let us then see the laws
that have been made by some of the different States respecting this branch of
trade.40

145

Indeed, Congress itself has recognised and acted on the power of the States to
prohibit this trade. The constitution restrained Congress (as has been already
seen) from prohibiting the importation of negroes, &c., before 1808. But in
1803, it passed 'an act to prevent the importation of certain persons into
certain States, where, by the laws thereof, their importation is prohibited.41
Proceeding upon the right of the several States to prohibit, and acting under
its general power to regulate commerce, it imposes additional penalties on the
importing or landing of any negro, mulatto, or person of colour, &c., in any
State which, by law, has prohibited, or shall prohibit, their admission or
importation. And it makes it the duty of the officers of the customs, to
notice and be governed by the provisions of the laws of the several States
prohibiting their importation or admission; and enjoins it on them vigilantly
to carry into effect the said laws of such States, any law of the United
States to the contrary notwithstanding. How could Congress do this, if the
power of _prohibiting_ the trade were not unquestionably possessed by the
States, in their sovereign capacity?

146

The quarantine laws further illustrate our position. The appellant's counsel
says, these are to be considered merely as laws of police; they are laws of
police, but they are also laws of commerce; for such is the nature of that
commerce, which we are told must be regulated exclusively by Congress, that it
enters into, and mixes itself with, almost all the concerns of life. But
surely that furnishes an argument, showing the necessity that the States
should have a _concurrent_ power over it. Judge Tucker considers them as laws
of commerce, when he says,42 'another consequence of the right of regulating
foreign commerce, seems to be, the power of compelling vessels infected with
any contagious disease, or arriving from places usually infected with them, to
perform their quarantine. The laws of the respective States upon this subject,
were, by some persons, supposed to have been virtually repealed by the
constitution of the United States:' (and why must not that be the case, if the
power of Congress regulating commerce be exclusive?) 'but Congress have
manifested a different interpretation of that instrument, and have passed
several acts for giving aid and effect to the execution of the laws of the
several States respecting quarantine.' It will be recollected, that the first
recognition by Congress of the quarantine laws, was in 1796; and that only
directs _the officers of the government_ to obey them; but does not pretend,
or attempt, to legalize them. And, indeed, it could not do so, if the States
had no concurrent power, and the regulation of commerce was _exclusively_
delegated to Congress; for the power which is _exclusively_ delegated to
Congress, can only be exercised by Congress itself, and cannot be sub-
delegated by it. It is, therefore, no reply to the force of the argument drawn
from those laws, to say, that they have been ratified by Congress. Another
answer to that observation is, that the supposed ratification by Congress did
not take place until 1796; and that many of those laws were in active
operation several years before. For instance, as few out of many: _New
Hampshire_ passed her quarantine laws first, February 3d, 1789,43 and again on
the 25th of September, 1792.44 _Connecticut_ passed hers in May, 1795.45 The
laws of _Maryland_46 show the temporary continucation of those laws in that
State, from 1784 to 1785, from 1785 to 1792, from 1792 to 1799, and so down to
1810; and the 2d vol.47 contains a law passed in November, 1793, giving to the
Governor the strongest powers on the subject. The State of _Virginia_ passed,
26th of December, 1792,48 'an act reducing into one the several acts to oblige
vessels coming from foreign parts, to perform quarantine;' which act was
amended on the 5th of December, 1793;49 and further amended on the 19th of
December, 1795.50 _Georgia_ passed her quarantine law December 17th, 1793.51
Undoubtedly those laws derive their efficacy from the sovereign authority of
the States; and they expressly restrain, and indeed prohibit, the entry of
vessels into part of the waters and ports of the States. They are all so
similar, that one or two may suffice as examples. The quarantine law of
_Georgia_ , s. 1. prohibits the landing of persons or goods coming in any
vessel from an infected place, without permission from the proper authority;
and enacts, that the said vessels or boats, and the persons and goods coming
and imported in, or going on board during the time of quarantine; and all
ships, vessels, boats, and persons, receiving any persons or goods under
quarantine, shall be subject to such orders, rules and directions, touching
quarantine, as shall be made by the authority directing the same. The law of
_Delaware_ , passed the 24th of January, 1797,52 s. 1. provides, that 'no
master of a ship bound to any part of that State, having on board any greater
number of passengers than forty, or any person with an infectious disease, or
coming from a sickly port, shall bring his ship, or suffer it to be brought,
nearer than one mile to any port or place of landing; nor land such persons,
or their goods, till he shall have obtained a permit.' The law of
_Massachusetts_ , passed June 22d, 1797, s. 6.53 enacts, that 'vessels passing
the castle, in Boston harbour, may be questioned and detained; s. 12. that
vessels at any other port than Boston, may be prevented from coming up, and
brought to anchor where the select men shall direct; s. 4. empowers the select
men of any town, bordering on either of the neighbouring States, to appoint
persons to attend at ferries and other proper places, by or over which
passengers may pass from such infected places, which persons have power to
examine, stop and restrain such passengers from travelling, until licensed by
a Justice of the peace, or the select men; and a fine of 100 pounds is enacted
on the passenger presuming to travel onward; s. 5. gives power to seize and
detain suspected goods coming from any other State,' &c. By an act of June
20th, 1799, s. 10.54 'any master, &c. who shall enter the harbour of Boston
after notice of a quarantine, for all vessels coming from the same place, &c.,
or who shall land, or suffer to be landed, any passenger or goods, without
permission of the board of health, is subject to fine and imprisonment.' These
are all obviously direct regulations of trade, and so is the whole of every
quarantine system.

147

The regulation of pilots in sea ports, flows from the power of regulating
external commerce. This power, like that of making quarantine regulations, has
hitherto been exclusively exercised by the several States; Congress having
only made one law on the subject, and that seems explicitly to recognise the
concurrent power of the States, and to place over it the true constitutional
control. By the 4th sec. of the act of August 7th, 1789, c. 9.55 it is
enacted, that 'all pilots in the bays, inlets, rivers, harbours and ports of
the United States, shall continue to be regulated in conformity with the
existing laws of the States, respectively, wherein such pilots may be; or with
such laws as the States may respectively hereafter enact for the purpose,
until further legislative provision shall be made by Congress.' Now, it is a
principle which cannot be too often brought into view or enforced, that
Congress cannot delegate to State Legislatures, the exercise of powers which
are given to it exclusively; and the very act of referring to those laws, is a
recognition that the power to legislate on the subject is concurrent.56

148

In like manner, the laws regulating light houses, buoys, &c. are all exercises
of the implied powers derived from that of regulating commerce. They have
hitherto been generally left to Congress; but it does not follow from thence,
that they are exclusive. Can it be doubted, that any State has a right to
establish a light house or buoys at its own expense, in one of its harbours?
That a State has such a power cannot be questioned, if it be shown that
individuals have. Some time in 1798, a number of the inhabitants of New-
Bedford, Massachusetts, raised a fund by subscription, for building and
maintaining a light house at Clark's Point, at the entrance of the harbour of
New-Bedford. They maintained it, and kept it regularly lighted for about a
year; and the act of Congress admits their right to do so. On the 29th of
April, 1800, Congress enacted, that the light house lately erected at Clark's
Point, &c., shall and may be supported at the expen of the United States, &c.
_Provided_ , that the property and jurisdiction of the said light house, and
sufficient territory for the accommodation thereof, shall be fully ceded and
legally vested in the United States.

149

The laws of Congress on this subject, recognise, the right of the States to
maintain light houses, if they please. The first act, passed August 7th,
1789,57 directs, that their expenses, after the 15th of August, 1789, shall be
defrayed out of the treasury of the United States: _Provided_ , nevertheless,
that none of the said expenses shall continue to be so defrayed by the United
States, after the expiration of one year, unless such light houses shall, in
the mean time, be ceded, &c. Few States did make the requisite cession; and by
the act of July, 1790,58 the time was extended to the 1st of July, 1791, and
so, from time to time, for five or six years, till all the States came in;
during which the light houses in several of the States were kept up by their
authority, without the control of Congress.

150

The inspection laws are very important regulations of trade. Tucker says,
'there seems to be one class of laws, which respects foreign commerce, over
which the States still retain an absolute authority; those I mean which relate
to the inspection of their own produce, for the execution of which, they may
even lay an impost or duty, as far as may be absolutely necessary for that
purpose. Of this necessity, it seems presumable, they are to be regarded as
the sole judges.' The extent and importance of this system of regulations does
not strike the mind at the first view; nor do the powerful inferences it
affords, to show the concurrent right in the States to regulate commerce.
Judge Tucker has very imperfectly stated their extent. They do, indeed,
regulate, in almost every State, the foreign trade, so far as it is connected
with our produce to be exported; but they do not confine themselves to produce
to be exported, they relate to _imports_ also. They act by restraining, and
sometimes prohibiting, the exportation and importation of certain articles.
Before examining those laws, it may be asked, from whence is the right of
_restraining_ derived, but from the more extended right of _prohibiting?_ The
difference between _regulation or restraining_ and _interdiction_ , is only a
difference of degree in the exercise of the same right, and not a difference
of right. The article in the constitution, art. 1. sec. 10. impliedly allows
that right to be in the several States, and the right to enforce their laws by
any other means than imposts and duties, and, therefore, by _prohibitions_ of
exports or imports. The right does not depend on the idea, that the thing
prohibited or restrained from being exported or imported, is _dangerous or
noxious;_ even if that could, _ex necessitate_ , create a right, and give it
to the State, instead of the congressional jurisdiction; on the contrary, the
rules and enactments seem arbitrary.59

151

As to trade with the Indian tribes, without stopping to enter into details, it
is sufficient to say, it must stand on the same footing as foreign commerce
and that among the States, as they are all given in the same sentence. If the
power of regulating the two latter be exclusive, so must it be with the
former. And yet every State, whose situation places it in communication or
contiguity with Indian tribes, has thought fit, and, indeed, found it
necessary, by acts of their own Legislatures, to regulate their trade with the
Indians, the laws of Congress not only not exhausting, but not even adequately
reaching the subject.

152

It now seems incontrovertibly established, that the States have a _concurrent_
right to legislate on matters of foreign trade, or of that between the States;
and a concurrent right to _prohibit_ the exportation or importation of
articles of merchandise. If they can do that, even as to the articles
themselves, to which the power of Congress expressly relates, and if the right
to regulate shipping be only impliedly given to Congress, by the general power
to regulate commerce, and only so far as they are instruments of that
commerce, why cannot a State, that has a concurrent right, within its own
sphere, (and that not by implication, but directly, and as the result of its
sovereign power, unabridged and unaltered by the constitution,) over all ships
or vessels within, or coming within, its jurisdiction, prohibit the entry of
any particular kind of vessels within its waters, subject always to be
controlled by the contradictory and paramount regulations of Congress, made
within the sphere of its powers.

153

This leads to the consideration of an argument that has been frequently urged
on this subject. It is said, that if a State has a right to prohibit the
navigation of its waters to steam boats, it has an equal right to prohibit the
same navigation to row boats or sailing vessels; and the extravagance of this
position, it is supposed, sufficiently refutes the assertion of a more limited
right. First, there is an error in the statement of our claim. We do not
prohibit the navigation of our waters to steam boats; we only prohibit them,
while in our waters, from using steam as the means of their propulsion. Every
steam boat which ventures on the ocean, carries and uses sails; and they can,
without difficulty, be adapted to every steam boat. Such a vessel, therefore,
may, without objection, load in a different State, or foreign port, and come,
by means of steam, to the verge of our waters; there is no difficulty opposed
to its coming up, with its full cargo, to our custom house, entering,
discharging, reloading, and departing, provided that, for the short space of
time while it may be in our waters, it employs the only things that any other
vessel can employ for entering and departing, and with which it is or may be
amply provided--sails and oars. That is the extent of what is very
inconsiderately called our extravagant claim. Let us now examine the argument
itself, and to test its soundness, let us apply it to other cases. A State has
no right to prohibit the use of narrow wheeled wagons for the transportation
of merchandise on any of its roads; for if it can do that, it can prohibit the
use of any kind of wagons, and, indeed, all transportation of merchandise on
any of its roads, and thus affect the commerce between different States. A
State has no right to regulate the assize of bread; for if it can do that, it
can prohibit all baking of bread, and thus starve the community. Is there any
one act of legislation against which the same reasoning, drawn from an
excessive and tyrannical exercise of legislative authority, may not be urged?
And if the argument be unsound, when applied to all those instances, what
makes it sound in its application to the present question? The answer to it is
found in the rights of a free people, which make every act of tyranny void.
But, either the right entirely to prohibit the use of row boats, sailing
vessels, and steam boats, belongs to some of the constituted authorities that
govern those States, or it does not. If it does not belong to any of them,
then, clearly, this boasted argument falls to the ground. If it does belong to
some of them, to whom does it belong? Has Congress the power to make such a
prohibition of all modes of commercial intercourse, by virtue of its limited
authority to regulate commerce with foreign powers, and between the different
States? In answering no, the embargo laws are fully remembered, and their
constitutionality admitted; but it is not derived from the power to regulate
commerce. The embargo was a measure of State policy, nearly approaching to
war: it may sometimes be of such a character as to derive a legitimate origin
from the war making power; but the embargo of 1807 rests for its
constitutionality on the power in Congress of providing for the common defence
and general welfare of the United States. If, then, the power of entirely
prohibiting trade, as a commercial measure, exists in some of the governing
powers of those States, and does not exist in Congress, where does it exist?
Assuredly in the State Legislatures. If its exercise should ever become void,
it will not be because it is contrary to the constitution of the United
States, but because it is oppressive to the people it affects to bind; not
because it is _unconstitutional_ , but because it is _tyrannical_.

154

Congress itself seems to acknowledge that the constitution does not deprive
the States of this prohibitory power; for, if it did, as it binds all the
citizens of the United States, it would necessarily bind the territorial
governments, and all States admitted into the Union subsequent to its
adoption. Yet, in the ordinance of the 13th of July, 1787, for the government
of the territory of the United States north west of the river Ohio,60 by art.
4th, for the government of the said territory, and the States which may be
formed therein, it is provided, among other matters, that 'the navigable
waters leading into the Mississippi and St. Lawrence, and the carrying places
between the same, shall be common highways, and for ever free, as well to the
inhabitants of the said territory, as to the citizens of the United States,
and those of any other States that may be admitted into the Confederacy,
without any tax, impost, or duty thereon.' It is made a fundamental provision
of the different acts erecting portions of this territory into States, that
their constitutions shall not be repugnant to this ordinance. In the act also
for erecting the State of Louisiana, sec. 3. it is enacted, that the
convention for making the constitution, shall provide by an ordinance,
irrevocable without the consent of the United States, among other things,
'that the river Mississippi, and the navigable waters leading into the same,
or into the gulf of Mexico, shall be common highways, and for ever free, as
well to the inhabitants of the said State, as to the other citizens of the
United States, without any tax, duty, impost or toll therefor, imposed by the
said State.' The same was also done with regard to the States of Mississippi
and Missouri. Now, this provision, so studiously introduced into all those new
compacts, which Congress had a right to make with new States, as the condition
of their admittance into the Union, would be very singular, and very useless,
if, by an effect of the Union itself, all navigable waters belonged
exclusively to the general government; or if the federal constitution, which
each State adopted, contained in itself an equivalent restraint on the States.
The appellant's counsel has alluded to and denied a position, stated to have
been used by counsel in arguing the case of _Livingston v. Van Ingen_ , before
the Court of Errors, that the Legislature might, if it thought fit, stop up
the mouth of the Hudson. It is of very little importance to defend what fell,
on that occasion from counsel, and has not been adopted by the Court; still,
the learned counsel may be asked, by what authority the State of Rhode Island
has erected a bridge over the Seakonnet branch of Taunton river, essentially
impairing, if not destroying, its navigation from the sea, and far below where
the tide ebbs and flows? By what authority his native State of New-Hampshire
has erected a bridge from Portsmouth over the Piscataqua river? By what
authority his adopted State of Massachusetts has built two bridges over
Charles river, on its tide waters, one near Boston, and the other higher up?
and, by what authority the State of Pennsylvania has built a dam over the
Schuylkill, near Philadelphia, and three miles below where the tide used
previously to ebb and flow?

155

There, however, is, in fact, no regulation of commerce, made by Congress, with
which this exclusive right does or can interfere. What is that degree or kind
of interference, which is sufficient to invalidate a State law?

156

The _Federalist_ ,61 discussing the cases where powers are exclusively
delegated to the United States, makes one of the classes, (and, perhaps,
unnecessarily, if not incorrectly,) where the constitution granted an
authority to the Union, to which a similar authority in the States would be,
absolutely and totally, _contradictory_ and _repugnant;_ and then goes on: 'I
use these terms to distinguish this last case from another, which might appear
to resemble it; but which would, in fact, he essentially different: I mean,
where the exercise of a concurrent jurisdiction might be productive of
occasional interferences in the policy of any branch of administration, but
would not imply any direct contradiction or repugnancy, in point of
constitutional authority.' And again: 'It is not, however, a mere possibility
of inconvenience in the exercise of powers, but an immediate constitutional
repugnancy, that can, by implication, alienate and extinguish a pre-existing
right of sovereignty.' That the third class of cases, as arranged by the
_Federalist_ , is unnecessary in its application to any of the powers, and
that it is derived from an erroneous notion, as to the possibility of
repugnancy and its consequences, seems to follow, from the principles laid
down by Thompson, J. in _Livingston v. Van Ingen_.62 'There are subjects upon
which the United States and the individual States must, of necessity, have
concurrent jurisdiction; and all fears and apprehensions of collision in the
exercise of these powers, which have been urged in argument, are unfounded.
_The constitution has guarded against such an event, by providing that the
laws of the United States shall be the supreme law of the land, any thing in
the constitution of any State of the contrary notwithstanding. In case of
collision, therefore, the State laws must yield to the superior authority of
the United States_.' The same doctrine is very ably maintained by Kent, Ch.
J.63 who gives, as a safe rule of construction and of action, 'that if any
given power _was originally vested in this State_ , if it has not been
exclusively ceded to Congress, or if the exercise of it has not been
prohibited to the States, we may then go on in the exercise of the power,
until it comes practically in collision with the actual exercise of some
congressional power. When that happens to be the case, the State authority
will so far be controlled; but it will still be good in all those respects, in
which it does not absolutely contravene the provision of the paramount law.'

157

The same doctrine is very briefly, but very clearly laid down, by Mr. Ch. J.
Marshall, in the case of Sturges v. Crowninshield:64 'It is not the mere
existence of the power, _but its exercise_ , which is incompatible with the
exercise of the same power by the States.' In Houston v. Moore,65 Mr. J.
Story, however, adopts the arrangement of the _Federalist_ , and goes on: 'In
all other cases, not falling within the classes already mentioned, it seems
unquestionable, that the States retain concurrent authority with Congress, not
only upon the letter and spirit of the 11th amendment of the constitution, but
upon the soundest principles of general reasoning. There is this reserve,
however, that in cases of concurrent authority, where the laws of the States
and of the Union are in direct and manifest collision on the same subject,
those of the Union, being the supreme law of the land, are of paramount
authority; and the State laws, so far, and _so far only_ as such
incompatibility exists, must necessarily yield.'

158

Although those authorities show, that nothing but a direct and absolute
collision can produce such an interference as will render the State grants
invalid, yet a license is relied on by our adversaries, as creating this
interference. There is a leading and fundamental error growing out of the
nature and form of that instrument, and one which has induced the supposition,
that a license _gives a right to trade_ , or a _right to enter_ , or a _right
to navigate_ the waters of the United States, to any vessel possessing it. It,
indeed, uses the words, 'license is hereby granted for the said vessel to be
employed in carrying on the coasting trade for one year, from the date hereof,
and no longer;' but those words must necessarily be understood in reference to
the extent of the authority granting the permission. Equivalent words are to
be found in every license to _distil_ or to _sell_ , or to do any act, the
right to do which existed prior to and independent of the authority by which
it may be regulated; and they only mean, license is granted to do the act,
notwithstanding the regulations made on that subject by the licensing
authority, and which, without this instrument, would restrain the act. So far
as those rights to _trade_ , to _enter_ , or to _navigate_ , exist unmodified,
they rest on the common law, independent of any _gift_ from or _right
conferred_ by Congress; which, in truth, has no power whereby it might be
enabled to make such gift, its authority being only to _regulate_ commerce.
These rights are, all three, portions of the _jus commune_ , and so far as the
competent Legislatures have thought fit to let them remain, the right to them,
and their efficacy, depend on that _jus commune_ and the common law. The right
_to trade_ is regulated by the State Legislatures and laws of Congress; the
right _to enter_ is modified principally by the laws of Congress; and the
right _to navigate the waters_ , almost exclusively by the State Legislatures.
_The license has nothing to do with any of those rights;_ it only gives some
privileges as to payment of tonnage duties, and less frequent entries at the
custom houses; and it exempts the licensed vessel from being included within a
restriction of the _jus commune_ as to trading, by which Congress prohibits
certain vessels from carrying foreign articles and distilled spirits from
State to State: even there, not _giving_ to the licensed vessel _the right_ of
doing so, but _only_ exempting them from the prohibition. A review of the acts
of Congress on the subject, will show the truth of these positions.

159

By the now repealed act of July 20th, 1789,66 imposing duties on tonnage,
different rates were fixed: 1st. six cents per ton on vessels built in the
United States, &c., and _belonging to a citizen or citizens of the United
States;_ 2d. thirty cents on vessels built in the United States, and
_belonging to foreigners;_ 3d. forty cents on all other ships and vessels. But
it was provided, that no United States built vessel, owned by a citizen, or
citizens, while employed in the _coasting trade_ , or on the fisheries, should
pay tonnage more than once a year; and that every ship employed in
transporting the produce and manutactures of the United States, unless United
States built, and owned by a citizen or citizens, should, on every entry, pay
50 cents per ton. The _only_ advantages, then, to American built and owned
ships, were, a less tonnage duty; and, if on the coasting trade, paying it
only once a year; _but let it be well remembered, that they had no exclusive
or peculiar right to trade any where_. By the collection law of July 31,
1789,67 which established ports of entry and delivery, it was enacted, that no
ship or vessel from a foreign port, not wholly belonging to a citizen or
citizens, should be permitted to unload at any port or place, except those
there specified.

160

Neither this, nor any other act, GIVES the _right of entering_ into the
designated ports. It proceeds on the supposition and the truth, that by some
other code, distinct from the laws of Congress, the entry into all places had
been antecedently lawful, and then _restrains it_ as to all other places but
those named.

161

The registering, recording, and enrolling of vessels, were enacted by the act
on that subject, passed September 1st, 1789.68 They were for the purpose of
describing the vessel, her built, tonnage, and ownership; and neither they,
nor their certificates, _give_ , nor purport to give, any _right to trade_.
The enrolment, and certificate of enrolement, is to entitle unregistered
vessels of twenty tons and upwards, American built and property, and destined
from district to district, or to the fisheries, to the privileges of a ship
belonging to the United States, employed in the coasting trade or fisheries.
These I have already mentioned, to be a less tonnage duty, and paying it only
once a year; but no exclusive or peculiar right to trade any where.69
Registered or enrolled vessels, on application to the collector where they
belonged, were entitled to receive _a license to trade between the different
districts in the United States_ , or carry on the bank or whale fishery for
one year.70 The meaning of that license, notwithstanding the generality of its
language, was only to certify that the proper tonnage duty for that year had
been paid; and that the vessel was _licensed_ , for that year, _to trade
without paying any tonnage duty_. That such is its object, appears from the
22d sec.71 enacting, that the master, &c. 'shall annually procure a license
from the collector of the district to which such vessel belongs, who is hereby
authorized to give the same, _purporting that such vessel is exempt from
clearing and entering for the term of one year from the date thereof_.' Every
vessel had a right to carry on the trade (between district and district)
without a license, on paying the prescribed tonnage duties, suited to the
case. That further appears, by a provision in the same section, (s. 23.) that
if any vessel of twenty tons or upwards, not having _certificate of registry_
, or _enrolment_ , and _a license_ , should be found trading between different
districts, or be employed in the bank or whale fisheries, _it should be
subject to the same tonnage and fees as foreign ships or vessels_.

162

The act, already cited, for tonnage and duties, was repealed by the act of
July 20th, 1790;72 but the substituted clauses do not affect this argument. A
ship _having a license_ to trade between different districts, or to carry on
the fisheries, while employed therein, is only to pay the six cents per ton
once a year, (i. e. on getting the license,) and 'upon every ship, &c. _not of
the United States_ , which shall be entered in one district from another,
having on board goods, &c. taken in one district, to be delivered in another,
_there shall be paid at the rate of fifty cents per ton;_ '73 a duty which
clearly recognises their right to carry on that trade on those terms.

163

The former act for registering and clearing vessels, was repealed by that
passed the 18th of February, 1793. This enacted, that none but _enrolled and
licensed_ ships, &c. (or, if under twenty tons, simply licensed,) should be
deemed ships or vessels of the United States, entitled to the privileges of
ships or vessels employed in the coasting trade or fisheries. These
privileges, it will be again remembered, are only the paying of a less tonnage
duty, and paying it but once a year; and they do not comprehend any exclusive
or peculiar right to trade any where. It enacts, that before getting the
license, the tonnage for the year must be paid; and the effect and object of
the license was to certify that the proper tonnage duty for that year had been
paid, and that the vessel was, therefore, _licensed_ for that year to trade
without paying tonnage. But every other vessel had still a right to trade. By
sec. 6.74 vessels of twenty tons and upwards, _except registered_ , found
trading between district and district, or different places in the same
district or fishery, _not enrolled and licensed_ , &c. If laden with domestic
produce or manufacture, _shall pay the same duties as foreign ships;_ or, if
laden with foreign produce or manufacture, or distilled spirits, shall be
forfeited. This shows that _foreign_ ships had a right to carry on the
coasting trade without a license, (a thing which they could not possible
obtain,) on paying the extra tonnage duties, and making entry at every port.
This further and most fully appears by the 24th section of the same act,75
prescribing the duties of masters of foreign ships, bound from one district to
another, whether with a cargo or in ballast; and by sec. 34.76 establishing
the rates of fees under that act, in which are found, 'For granting a permit
for a vessel _not belonging to a citizen or citizens of the United States_ ,
to proceed from district to district, and receiving the manifest, 200 cents.
For receiving a manifest, and granting a permit to unload, for such last
mentioned vessel, on her arriving in one district from another district, 200
cents.' Indeed, until the year 1817, there was no kind of prohibition on
foreign vessels carrying on the coasting trade. On the 1st of March, 1817, 'an
act concerning the navigation of the United States' was passed; and by sec. 4.
it was enacted, 'that no goods, wares, or merchandise, shall be imported,
under penalty of forfeiture thereof, from one port of the United States to
another port of the United States, in a vessel belonging, wholly or in part,
to a subject of any foreign power.' This, however, does not affect _American_
ships not having a license, and _they_ have still a right to trade coastwise,
subject only to the increased tonnage duty, and the necessity of making entry
at every port. How, then, can it be said, that the license _gives_ the right
to carry on the coasting trade, which exists as part of the _jus commune_ ,
and existed, and was exercised, before the constitution, or any law on the
subject, was formed; and when, until March, 1817, every foreign vessel had a
right to carry it on; and when, to this hour, every American vessel has a
right to carry it on, without a license or register, and only becomes subject
to an increase of tonnage duty, and the necessity of making entry at the
custom-house on every voyage? It is only a license to carry on the coasting
trade, _without making entry or paying tonnage duties, conformably to the laws
of Congress in other cases_. It _gives_ no _right_ to enter, nor to trade, nor
to navigate the waters of the United States: it only enables the licensed
vessel to do those things, in certain cases, on cheaper and easier terms then
other vessels could, who, nevertheless, had equal rights to carry on the same
trade, though with less advantages; and now, in the event of having foreign
produce or manufacture, or distilled spirits, on board, a license protects
from a forfeiture, which was not enacted for some years after licenses were
devised and used in their present shape. It is not, then, a license to trade,
to enter, or to navigate, but _to be exempt from paying tonnage duty for a
year_. If, then, the position is correct, (and it undoubtedly is,) that a
license gives no right to trade, to enter a port, or to navigate its waters,
no argument can be drawn from the act of March 12, 1812, 'respecting the
enrolling and licensing of steam boats.'77 The only object of that law is, to
enable aliens to be part owners of such vessels, and to modify, as to them,
the oath that the boat belongs to a citizen or citizens of the United States.

164

But, even if the _right of entry_ , or _to trade_ or _navigate_ , were _given_
by the acts of Congress, and not by the common law, as originally existing or
subsequently modified, this exclusive right does not prevent the entry of any
vessels into our waters, nor their navigating or trading there; nor does it
materially impede them. The only part of this exclusive grant that can come
under the cognizance of this Court, in this case, is that on which the
injunction is grounded. That, and the prohibition of the injunction, can only
be fairly considered as extending to prevent the navigation of the waters by
the force or agency of steam or fire; not to prevent vessels from navigating
those waters, because they have a steam engine on board, and wheels at the
side, if the engine and the wheels be not used on our waters for propelling
the vessel, contrary to our State laws. Before the vessel comes into those
waters, and after it leaves them, it is out of the State jurisdiction, and not
liable to any State penalty for using the agency of steam. What, then, is the
amount of the prohibition of entry? That the same vessel, with the same cargo
and crew, may come up and pass through our waters, if, while in our waters,
she will come up and navigate _under sail_ , as all commercial vessels have
hitherto done. In the argument of this case before the Court of Errors,78 one
of the appellant's counsel couched his reasoning in the form of a remonstrance
by an English ship master against those State laws. The reply can, perhaps, be
best given by turning the discussion into a dialogue. An English steam vessel
is boarded by a pilot, outside of Sandy-Hook. 'Captain,' says the pilot, 'you
will have to stop those wheels at your sides, when you get within our waters.'
'Why so?' asks the captain. 'Because the State of New-York have granted to
Livingston and Fulton an exclusive right of navigating in its waters by
steam.' 'Sir,' resumes the captain, 'I care nothing for the laws of New-York.
I know of no laws or regulations of a particular State, in regard to trade and
commerce. I claim the privilege of entering the harbour of New-York, under the
laws of the United States, and the treaty of amity and commerce subsisting
between them and my sovereign. I insist upon my right of entering your waters
as I please; and if your State authorities, or any one acting under them,
should prevent me, the King, my master, will know how to enforce the rights of
his subjects.' 'Patience, good captain, patience,' replies the pilot; 'let
your head and your boiler cool; no one means to prevent your entering into our
waters. Only stop your machinery, and hoist those sails you have carried
twenty times between this and Liverpool, and, I'll answer for it, we shall be
alongside the wharf as soon as you vessel, that you see bound inwards, with
all her canvass spread.' This is the extent of the prohibition--the _Deo
dignus vindice nodus!_ When the case occurs of a vessel navigating across the
Atlantic, without sails, the question may be discussed, whether it be a
violation of the laws of Congress, that she should be required to fit herself
to the harbour, by providing herself with a sail. The same may be said as to
coasting vessels from more distant States. As to those from contiguous States,
and whose trade can just as well be carried on by sails as by steam engines,
it is ridiculous to say, that such a regulation prohibits or interferes with
their commerce. Is it any part of the power intended to be delegated to
Congress, to regulate as to those matters? The utmost that can be said is,
that the passage may be a little longer, and may be somewhat retarded. The
doctrine of the _Federalist_79 applies here, that it is not a mere possibility
of inconvenience in the exercise of powers, but an immediate constitutional
repugnancy, that can, by implication, alienate and extinguish a pre-existing
right of sovereignty. Regulations for a toll-bridge may delay the mail
carrier, and so far interfere with the execution of the power delegated to
Congress, of regulating the post office and post roads; but, could he _gallop_
over a bridge, that a State law directed should always be crossed on a walk?

165

But the clause in the constitution, authorizing Congress to make laws
respecting patents, is supposed to present another argument against the
constitutionality of those State laws. This point, having been but very
slightly mentioned, and in some measure abandoned, by the appellant's opening
counsel, would not be dwelt on now, if the Attorney General had not intimated
an intention of insisting and relying on it. If the appellant had a patent of
any kind, on which he could rest, it might fairly be urged by us that a patent
cannot give to any unpatented thing even though connected with one that is
patented, the right to violate the State law. But how does or can that
question come up in this case? There is here no allegation of a patent, nor a
claim of any thing entitled to be protected by the patent law, and the use or
enjoyment of which has been interfered with by the exclusive grant. As the
appellant claims no patent, if this power in Congress can furnish to him any
objection against the State laws, it must be on the ground, that inasmuch as
Congress is authorized to promote the progress of science and useful arts, by
securing, for limited times, to authors and inventors the exclusive right to
their respective writings and discoveries, every State law, calculated or
purporting to promote the progress of science and useful arts, is utterly
void, merely because that is its purport and object, even though it should not
relate to any invention or discovery; though the privileges it may confer
should not be given on the score of invention or discovery, but of public
policy and convenience; and further, although there is no discovery or
invention of any other person in existence, the right to which Congress could
secure, and which has any relation to the State grant. That, in short, the
appellant, or any other person, has a right to treat the State law as a
nullity, and, in violation of it, to use unpatented articles, and incapable of
being the subject of a patent or protection; and, that no Court or process of
law has authority to restrain him from the use of what never can come within
the power of Congress; because, peradventure, something may hereafter be
discovered, having some relation to the subject of the State grant, and some
person may, hereafter, be entitled to claim the benefit of the constitutional
protection, as an inventor. The extraordinary boldness of this position must
surprise and astonish. If the passing of the patent law is _per se_ competent
to prevent a State granting this exclusive right, for a thing (so far as the
pleadings show) not the subject of a patent, it is equally so to prevent a
State granting every other exclusive right, and particularly if connected with
science and the useful arts. If the _law alone_ will not produce that effect,
until a patent is granted, at variance with the exclusive right, the patent
should appear, to let us see if it be really at variance, and have that
effect.

166

If the last steam boat laws, enacted since the North River boats were in
operation, had, instead of using a general phraseology, forbid any person to
use, on the waters of the State, steam boats constructed or made _in the same
manner_ as those then used by Livingston and Fulton, or _in any manner before
known or used_ , or _in any manner invented by a non-resident alien_ , would
there be any thing for the patent laws or power of Congress to operate on in
collision thereto? If not, then those State laws are _so far good;_ and any
one, to impeach their operation, must claim and show that he has a boat
constructed in a different manner, and which is patented as an invention, or,
at least, is a subject for the laws of Congress to operate upon, and which he
is restrained from using.

167

Has it ever been disputed that each State has a right to grant exclusive
privileges, where not forbidden to the Legislature by its constitution? The
wisdom and the motives of the grant, are points for which it is responsible to
the people of the State only; they can never be drawn into discussion in this
Court, nor come under the control of Congress. It is a right inherent in the
sovereignty of every country, not delegated to Congress, but allowed to, and
constantly exercised by, the State governments. It is a legislative instrument
of great power, and may, therefore, be used to evil purposes; but it may be,
and often has been, as in the present instance, productive of splendid
benefits. It must reside somewhere; it does not reside in Congress; where,
then, does it reside?

168

Whether the power delegated to Congress be exclusive or concurrent, the power
of promoting science and useful arts, by the introduction of _imported_
improvements, and encouraging the employment of things not susceptible of
being patented, is _exclusively_ in the State Legislatures. It is of great
importance, and exercised by every wise government; by England, France, &c. It
domesticates the sciences and useful arts, the talents and genius of the
civilized world. The States, in the exercise of this their _exclusive power_ ,
which has been employed in making those laws, are not to be interfered with
from any apprehension of collision in the exercise of a _concurrent_ power,
only relating to another branch of the same subject, _which the State has not
used_ , and which Congress may never have an opportunity of using.

169

I say, a _concurrent_ power; for such is that delegated to Congress. One of
the counsel now opposed to us, in his argument in the case of _Sturges v.
Crowninshield_ ,80 places in his third class, that is, among the concurrent
powers, that to promote the progress of science and useful arts; and says,
very truly, 'from the exercise of any of these powers, the States are neither
expressly, nor by any fair rule of construction, excluded.' Judge Tucker, in
his Appendix D. p. 182. 265. among the cases in which the States have
_unquestionably_ concurrent, though, perhaps, subordinate powers, with the
federal government, ranks the power to promote the progress of science and the
useful arts, by securing to the authors and inventors the exclusive right,
_within the State_ , to their respective writings and discoveries. In the case
of _Livingston v. Van Ingen_ ,81 Thompson, J. takes for granted, that it is
so, and it is expressly asserted by _Kent_ , C. J.; and in the same case, an
instance is given of its exercise, by an act of the Legislature of New-York,
in favour of Mr. Rumsey, passed on the 23d of February, 1789, after the
adoption of the federal constitution, and shortly before the first meeting of
Congress. It was entitled, 'for securing to James Rumsey the sole right and
advantage of making and employing, for a limited time, the several mechanical
improvements by him lately invented.'82 I do not speak from research, but I
understand that he obtained a similar patent from several other States. This
law is a cotemporaneous exposition of the constitution, and shows that the
State considered itself as still retaining a concurrent right of legislation
on the subject of inventions in science and the useful arts, notwithstanding
the new constitution, and the recent transfer of similar powers to Congress.

170

What is the power delegated to Congress, and on what principle is it founded?
A confined and partial mode of promoting the progress of science and useful
arts, viz. by _securing_ , for a limited time, to authors and inventors, the
exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries. The _Federalist_
, No. 43,83 says, 'the utility of this power will scarcely be questioned. The
_copyright_ of authors has been solemnly adjudged in Great Britain to be a
right at common law. The right to useful inventions seems, with equal reason,
to belong to the inventors.' This commentary, and the words of the
constitution, show that the power is only founded on the principle of literary
property extended to inventions. It proceeds upon assuming a pre-existent
common law right, which, however, requires to be properly _secured_ by
adequate remedies. Its principle is entirely different from that on which
patents rest in England. _They_ are exclusive rights, _not merely secured_ ,
but _created and granted; they_ are monopolies for things invented or
imported, and do not suppose or act on any _pre-existent right;_ but grant a
right, the origin and efficacy of which is derived from its being a gift from
the crown, permitted and legalized by act of Parliament. It is contended,
because the English Judges have construed their statute of monopolies so as to
include imported improvements, under the term _inventions_ , that our
constitution should receive the same construction; but there is no foundation
for the position. The English Judges strained the words of their statute,
contrary to all fair construction, because they felt the importance of a power
to encourage imported improvements, and saw no other way by which it could be
done; and, besides, their interpretation went to strengthen and increase the
royal prerogative. But, with us, imported improvements can be perfectly
encouraged by the States; and the power delegated to Congress, is founded on
the common law pre-existent right of inventors to their own discoveries, which
can have no application to the mere possessors of imported improvements. The
constitution itself does not use the word _patent_ , and it is to be regretted
that the act of Congress does; for, the use of the word implying a resemblance
to the English patent, has led to a false view of the powers of Congress.

171

But, in truth, according to the English acceptation of the term, Congress has
no power to grant them. It has no authority to make exclusive _grants_ of any
kind; that power remains solely in the States, as a part of their original
sovereignty, which has never come within the purview of the federal
constitution. A patent, in England, and every country but this, implies, the
creation and gift of a right, by force of the sovereign power, conferring upon
an individual a monopoly, in which he had no pre-existent right. This can be
done by the States, and only by the States. The power delegated to Congress,
does not authorize it to _create_ any _right_ , or to _give_ any _right;_ it
only enables that body to _secure_ a pre-existent common law right, and for
that purpose it may _create and give a remedy_. Where there is no pre-existent
right to be secured, the power of Congress cannot operate. To these positions,
the attention of the Court is directed, as they may be found important in the
sequel.

172

Although the article in the constitution is expressed with accuracy, yet it
also has employed a word, sometimes taken in different senses, and which has
likewise contributed to a false view of the power of Congress: the expression
is, 'an _exclusive_ right.' The word 'exclusive' may well mean, as it does
here, _individual, sole_ , or _separate_ , in which sense, every man's private
property, to which no other man has any claim, is his _exclusive property_. In
that sense, Judge Chase says, in the case of Calder et ux. v. Bull et ux.84
'If any one has a right to property, such right is a _perfect and exclusive
right_.' But, that word, _exclusive_ , is more frequently applied to express,
that others have been excluded or shut out from the participation of what they
were previously entitled, or would, but for that exclusion, be entitled to
enjoy and use. In this sense, the phrase, _exclusive rights or privileges_ ,
is ordinarily understood. But, it never was intended to give Congress any
power to grant exclusive privileges; and in the article of the constitution,
that meaning of the word would be inconsistent with the idea of securing a
pre-existing right. All error would have been avoided, if the adjective had
been entirely omitted, or the word _individual_ substituted.

173

At the time of making the State grant in question, no man had, and, indeed, no
man yet has, any pre-existing right to an invention, connected with the
subject matter of the grant. Suppose any man, however, now to make an
invention, and seek to use it without procuring for himself a patent, or
availing himself of the power delegated to Congress, surely the law of the
State would be competent to prevent his using it within its waters and
jurisdiction. The statute law would, in that instance, operate on the common
law, and prevent the common law right, _pro tanto_ , from ever arising, in the
same way as in a fishery. The right of fishing, in a public navigable river,
is a common right; but, suppose that before the birth of any given individual,
a part of that navigable river had, by statute, been turned into a several
fishery, surely his common right would not entitle him to fish in that part of
the navigable river which a statute had, before the commencement of his common
right, turned into a separate fishery. His right to fish _there_ never had a
commencement or origin--So with this supposed inventor. A statute, prior to
the commencement of his common law right, so acted on that common law itself,
that a right in him to use his invention, in the waters of the State, never
had a commencement or origin. Now, suppose the inventor to procure a patent;
would that enable him to use his patented invention within the jurisdiction
and waters of a State, contrary to its statutes? If it did, what would be its
operation? The delegated power is only _to secure_ a pre-existent right; it
can only do that, so far as there is a pre-existent right; where there is not,
there is nothing to be secured. So far, then, as relates to any use or
exercise of the invention within the State, there would be no right to be
secured, and nothing for the power of Congress to operate upon. But further,
if the inventor, before obtaining his patent, could not legally use his
invention, but, after obtaining his patent, could use it in despite of the
State laws, the patent would then _create and give_ a right that did not exist
before, and thus transcend the power delegated to Congress, which does not
enable that body _to create or give any right_ , but only to _create and give
a remedy_ , for the purpose of _securing_ an existing right, which derives its
origin and force from some other law or laws than those made by congress.

174

So far, then, as relates to those State laws, it is impossible that their
validity can be affected by the patenting of any invention or discovery made
subsequent to their enactment. But it may still be advisable to pursue the
same course of reasoning, and inquire how far even the existence of a patent,
previous to the passing of such acts, would enable the patentee to use his
invention in despite of them.

175

The object of a patent, granted in pursuance of the delegated power, is to
perfect an imperfect right, by exactly ascertaining, if I may say so, its
means, and boundaries, and identity, and by affording an adequate remedy for
its violation. The precise nature of the remedy is within the discretion of
Congress; but the nature of the evil it purports to remedy, is entirely
illustrative of the extent of the power delegated to Congress. The patent law
itself shows that its object is, to turn the imperfect right into _property_ ,
for it directs, that the applicant's petition shall signify a desire of
obtaining an _exclusive property_ in his improvement. And the clause giving
the remedy, shows the injury against which Congress intended to guard, and
against which alone it had any power, under the constitution, to provide a
guard: where any person 'shall _make, devise, use_ , or _sell_ ' the thing,
whereof the exclusive right is secured to the patentee by such patent, &c.85
But, no remedy is provided against _preventing_ the patentee from _making,
devising, using_ or _selling_ the thing so patented. _That_ , if any grievance
at all, is one not within the purview of the act, nor within the powers of
Congress, and against which, therefore, no remedy is there provided.

176

The object of this power, and of the law made under it, is to give to the pre-
existent but imperfect right, the security and attributes of _actual_
property. When the law of Congress has done that, it is _functus officio;_ and
it leaves that right, which it has placed in the class of _actual_ property,
to be used and enjoyed like every other kind of actual property, conformably
to the laws of the place where it is to be enjoyed. That which is thus the
object of the power and law of Congress, is the _patent-right_ , which it has,
as it were, converted into a chattel. But the difference between the patent-
right and the thing patented, is great and palpable, equal to the difference
between a copy-right and a book. If a State attempted to authorize a violation
of these rights, to enable another to make use of or vend the thing patented,
or to print the book, or to throw open and in common, the patent-right or the
copy-right, then its law would be unconstitutional. But the _rights_ , and
_only the rights_ , are the object of the power and laws of Congress; the
things themselves are personal property or chattels of the ordinary kind, to
be enjoyed, like all other property, subject to laws over which Congress has
no control.

177

If so, why has not a State a right to prohibit the use of the _thing patented_
within its jurisdiction? It can do so, as to all other kinds of property. It
is no argument to say, that if one State can do it, every State can do it. If
every State wished to do it, how could they, or why should they, be prevented?
But, is not that the case with every kind of property? And if they should
extend that power over any species of unpatented property, could Congress
interfere? The individual States having that power over every kind of
originally perfect property, can it be supposed, that because Congress was
empowered to turn imperfect into perfect property, this newly secured species
should occupy a superior class, and possess privileges and exemptions that
were never attached to any other kind of property? The power of regulating and
prohibiting the use of every kind of property must be somewhere; it is a
necessary part of legislative sovereignty, and must be intrusted to some
constituted authority. As to all other kinds of property, it is undoubtedly in
the State Legislatures. Things patented may be dangerous or noxious; they may
be generally useful, and locally injurious; such, for instance, might be
torpedoes in a peaceful and commercial port; fire balloons and squibs in a
populous city; though, in some places and on some occasions, they may well be
useful and advantageous, or, at least, harmless. Among the curiosities in the
patent office, there probably are some patented velocipedes. The Corporation
of New-York, in 1819, by an ordinance, prohibited the use of any velocipede in
the streets of that city. Had it not a right to do so; and could the owner of
any of those patent velocipedes use them in the streets, in despite of that
ordinance? The Legislature of New-York has, for many years, prohibited the
drawing of any lotteries there, except what it has granted to certain public
institutions, such as Union College, and the College of Physicians. By virtue
of the prohibition to others, and the grant to those institutions, they have
obtained an exclusive right of drawing lotteries. similar to that, the
constitutionality of which is now in controversy. Joseph Vanini has patented a
new mode of drawing lotteries, which is, unquestionably, a great improvement,
simplifying the operation, and, by completing it in less than five minutes,
preventing all insurances, and many of the evils attendant on the old mode.
But, could he, because his invention is an improvement and patented, insist on
a right to use it, and draw lotteries in the State of New-York, contrary to
its laws, and indeed, now, to the express provisions of its constitution? No.
The power to prohibit the use of patented things, either generally or locally,
must reside somewhere. Can Congress prohibit the use of locally injurious, but
patented, things, in the waters, or the cities, or the populous towns of New-
York? If not, because it has no power of regulation or prohibition, where does
that power reside? If it reside, as it must, _exclusively_ in the State
Legislatures, or subordinate authorities, who but their constituents can
inquire into the motives or propriety of their exercise of that power, or the
extent to which it should be carried? If the States have not that regulating
and controlling power, as Congress assuredly has it not, what is the
consequence? A patent can be got for any thing, and with no previous competent
authority to decide upon its utility or fitness. If it once issues from the
patent office, as full of evils as Pandora's box, if they be as new as those
that issued from thence, it is above the restraint and control of the State
Legislatures--of the Legislature of the United States--of every human
authority! I put the case of their being noxious or dangerous; but there may
be a multitude of other reasons for regulating, restraining, or even
prohibiting their use; of these Congress can take no cognizance. If the State
governments can take no cognizance of them, no institution can; if they _can_
take cognizance, their power is exclusive, and their exercise of it cannot be
reviewed. Could Congress (incapable as it is, of itself, prohibiting the use
of patented things,) pass a law, _in words_ , that a patentee shall have a
right to use his patented machine in any State, notwithstanding any
prohibitory laws of that State? Would that be within the power of Congress?
How, then, can implication give to the patentee the same right? If a patent
can give a right to use the thing patented, in contravention of this exclusive
right, it would have the same effect in contravention of any other exclusive
right granted by a State. Ferries, stage-coaches, &c. all the grants
respecting them, would be broken down by some patented vehicle, for, they are
all, _in pari materia_ , exclusive grants, from motives of public policy; and,
having no connexion with the principle of literary property, which is the
origin and the object of patent-rights, they cannot be affected by any power
given to Congress. A State has the same jurisdiction and authority over its
rivers and lakes, that it has over its canals. Now, if the Legislature of New-
York judged it advisable so to do, could it not prohibit any boat, using some
patented machinery, from navigating its western canal? If it could, why could
it not make the same prohibition as to its rivers and lakes; and if the act
here should be an excess or abuse of legislation, would not its responsibility
be _exclusively_ to the people of the State?

178

The State of New-York, from motives not examinable here, made a _contract_ ,
which is the foundation of our right; it could only do so by a law. The State
had a right to contract, and, so far, it stands on the same footing as if _one
individual_ contracted, for a valuable consideration, with another, to receive
his supplies of any article from him only. In the case of individuals, could a
man, having a patented improvement of the same article, insist on annulling
that contract, as interfering with his exclusive right and patent? If not, why
should not a State, capable of contracting, have the same right to make that
bargain, and, consequently, exclude the use of the patented article in its
jurisdiction and domain, as an individual has in his own house and farm? The
waters of the State are the domain and property of the State, subject only to
the commercial regulations of Congress. Why should not the contract of a
State, in regard to its domain and property, be as sacred as that of an
individual? Such a contract was in this, and may in many cases, be very useful
and advantageous. Who is to judge of that but the State Legislatures? Could
Congress have made this contract, or acquired this benefit for the State?
Certainly not. If the State cannot, what power or authority can? And is it
come to this, that a contract, such as every individual in the land may wisely
and lawfully make, for his own benefit, and to be enforced in his own
premises, no State, and no authority for any State, can make for its benefit,
and to be enforced in its jurisdiction?

179

There are circumstances connected with those laws, sufficient to make any
tribunal require the strongest arguments before it adjudged them invalid. The
State of New-York, by a patient and forbearing patronage of ten years, to
Livingston and Fulton, by the tempting inducement of its proferred reward, and
by the subsequent liberality of its contract, has called into existence the
noblest and most useful improvement of the present day. Genius had contended
with its inherent difficulties, for generations before; and if some had nearly
reached, or some even touched, the goal, they sunk exhausted, and the result
of their efforts perished in reality, and almost in name. Such would,
probably, have been the end of Fulton's labours; and, neither the wealth and
talents of his associate, nor the resources of his own great mind, would have
saved him from the fate of others, if he had not been sustained, for years, by
the wise and considerate encouragement of the State of New-York. She has
brought into noonday splendour, an invaluable improvement to the intercourse
and consequent happiness of man, which, without her aid, would, perhaps, have
scarcely dawned upon our grandchildren. She has not only rendered this service
to her own citizens, but the benefits of her policy have spread themselves
over the whole Union. Where can you turn your eyes, and where can you travel,
without having your eyes delighted, and some part of the fatigues of your
journey relieved, by the presence of a steam boat? The Ohio and Mississippi,
she has converted into rapid channels for communicating wealth, comforts and
enjoyments, from their mouths to their head waters. And the happy and
reflecting inhabitants of the States they wash, may well ask themselves,
whether, next to the constitutions under which they live, there be a single
blessing they enjoy from the art and labour of man, greater than what they
have derived from the patronage of the State of New-York to Robert Fulton. But
the mighty benefits that have resulted from those laws, are not circumscribed,
even by the vast extent of our Union. New-York may raise her head, she may
proudly raise her head, and cast her eyes over the whole civilized world; she
there may see its countless waters bearing on their surface countless
offsprings of her munificence and wisdom. She may fondly calculate on their
speedy extension in every direction and through every region, from Archangel
to Calcutta; and justly arrogating to herself the labours of the man she
cherished, and, conscious of the value of her own good works, she may turn the
mournful exclamation of AEneas into an expression of triumph, and exultingly
ask,

180

_Quae regio in terrris, nostri non plena laboris?_

181

And it is, after all those advantages have beer acquired and realized to the
world--after numerous individuals have embarked their fortunes, or the faith
of those grants, and a ten years acquiescence in the decision by which they
were sanctioned--after the property they have created has been diffused among
a multitude of possessors after it has become the sole support of the widow
and the orphan after it has received and exhausted the accumulated savings of
the laborious and industrious heads of families, that a decision is required,
which cannot, indeed, undo the lasting benefits already procured to the world,
but would, assuredly, undo many of those who have confided their wealth and
means to the stability and observance of those laws!

182

The _Attorney-General_ , for the appellant, in reply, insisted, that the laws
of New-York were unconstitutional and void:

183

1\. Because they are in conflict with powers exclusively vested in Congress,
which powers Congress has fully exercised, by laws now subsisting and in full
force.

184

2\. Because, if the powers be concurrent, the legislation of the State is in
conflict with that of Congress, and is, therefore, void.

185

He stated, that the powers with which the laws of New-York conflict, are the
power 'to promote the progress of science and the useful arts, by securing,
for a limited time, to authors and inventors, the exclusive right to their
respective writings and inventions,' and the power 'to regulate commerce with
foreign nations, and among the several States.' If these powers were exclusive
in Congress, and it had exercised them by subsisting laws; and if the laws of
New-York interfere with the laws of Congress, by obstructing, impeding,
retarding, burdening, or in any other manner controlling their operation, the
laws of New-York are void, and the judgment of the State Court, founded on the
assumption of their validity, must be reversed.

186

In discussing this question, the general principles assumed, as postulates, on
the other side, might be, for the most part, admitted. Thus, it might be
admitted, that by force of the declaration of independence, each State became
sovereign; that they were, then, independent of each other, and foreign to
each other; that by virtue of their separate sovereignty, they had, each, full
power to levy war, to make peace, to establish and regulate commerce, to
encourage the arts, and generally to perform all other acts of sovereignty. It
was also conceded, that the government of the United States is one of
delegated powers; and the counsel for the respondent added, that it is one of
enumerated powers. Yet they admitted that there were implied powers, and had
given a different rule for the construction of the two classes of powers,
which was, that 'the express powers are to be construed _strictly_ , the
implied powers _liberally_.' But the implied powers, he presumed, were only
those which are necessary and proper to carry the powers, expressly given,
into effect--the means to an end. This clause had not been generally regarded
as, in fact, giving any new powers. Congress would have had them without the
express declaration. The clause was inserted only _ex abundanti cautela_. With
this explanation, it might be conceded, that the constitution of the United
States is one of delegated and enumerated powers; and that all powers, not
delegated by the constitution to the national government, nor prohibited by it
to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people. The
peculiar rule of construction demanded for those powers, might also be
conceded: that the express powers are to be strictly construed, the implied
liberally. By which was understood to be meant, that Congress can do no more
than they are _expressly_ authorized to do; though the means of doing it are
left to their discretion, under no other limit than that they shall be
necessary and proper to the end.

187

On the other hand, the counsel for the respondent themselves admitted, that
Congress, nevertheless, has some exclusive powers; and, in conformity with the
decisions of the Court, they admit that those exclusive powers exist under
three heads. (1.) When the power is given to Congress in express terms of
exclusion. (2.) When a power is given to Congress, and a like power is
expressly prhibited to the States. (3.) Where a power given to Congress, is of
such a nature, that the exercise of the same power by the States would be
repugnant.

188

With regard to the degree of repugnancy, it was insisted, that the repugnancy
must be manifest, necessary, unavoidable, total, and direct. Certainly if the
powers be repugnant at all, they must be so with all these qualifications. If
Congress, in the lawful exercise of its power, says that a thing shall be
done, and the State says it shall not; or, which is the same thing, if
Congress says that a thing shall be done, on certain terms, and the State says
it shall not be done, except on certain other terms, the repugnancy has all
the epithets which can be lavished upon it, and the State law must be void for
this repugnancy.

189

A new test for the application of this third head of exclusive power, had been
proposed. It was said, that 'no power can be exclusive from its own nature,
except where it formed no part of State authority previous to the
constitution, but was first created by the constitution itself.' But why were
these national powers thus created by the constitution? Because they look to
the whole United States as their theatre of action. And are not all the powers
given to Congress of the same character? Under the power to regulate commerce,
the commerce to be regulated is that _of the United States_ with foreign
nations, among the several States, and with the Indian tribes. No State had
any previous power of regulating these. The same thing might be affirmed of
all the other powers enumerated in the constitution. They were all created by
the constitution, because they are to be wielded by the whole Union over the
whole Union, which no State could previously do. If any one power, created by
the constitution, may be exclusive for that reason, then all may be exclusive,
because all are originally created. If, on the other hand, we are to consider
the powers enumerated in the constitution, not with reference to the greater
arm that wields them, and the more extended territory over which they operate,
but merely in reference to the nature of the particular power in itself
considered; then, according to this new test, all the powers given to Congress
are _concurrent;_ because there is no one power given to it, which, considered
in this light, might not have been previously exercised by the States within
their respective sovereignties. But this argument proved too much: for, it has
been conceded, that some of the powers are exclusive from their nature;
whereas, if the argument were true, none of them could be exclusive. On this
argument, the entire class or head of exclusive powers, arising from the
nature of the power, must be abolished. But this Court had repeatedly
determined, that there is such a class of exclusive powers. The power of
establishing a uniform rule of naturalization, is one of the instances. Its
exclusive character is rested on the constitutional requisition, that the rule
established under it should be uniform.86

190

It had been objected, that this would have been a concurrent power, but for
the auxiliary provision in the constitution, that a citizen of one State shall
be entitled to all the privileges of a citizen in every other State. The
answer was, that it is not so determined by the Court in the case cited, and
that the commentators on the constitution place it exclusively on the nature
of the power as described in the grant.87

191

So also, the power of establishing _uniform_ laws on the subject of
bankruptcies, is clearly an exclusive power from its nature. The Court has,
indeed, determined, that until Congress thought fit to exercise the power, the
States might pass local bankrupt laws, provided they did not impair the
obligation of contracts; but, that as soon as Congress legislate on the
subject, the power of the States is at an end.88

192

But it had been said, that this doctrine takes away State power, by
implication, which is contrary to the principles of interpretation laid down
by the commentators on the constitution. It was not the opinion of the authors
of the _Federalist_ , that a State power could not be alienated by
implication. Their doctrine was, that it might be alienated by implication,
provided the implication be inevitable; and that it is inevitable wherever a
direct and palpable repugnancy exists. The distinction between repugnancy and
occasional interference, is manifest. The occasional interference, alluded to
in the _Federalist_ , and admitted by this Court, in its adjudications, is not
a repugnancy between the powers themselves: it is a mere incidental
interference in the operation of powers harmonious in themselves. The case
put, was of a tax laid by Congress, and a tax laid by the State, upon the same
subject, _e. g._ on a tract of land. The taxes operate upon, and are to be
satisfied out of the same subject. It might be inconvenient to the proprietor
to pay both taxes. In an extreme case, the subject might be inadequate to the
satisfaction of both. Then the tax laid by the paramount authority must be
first satisfied. Still, this incidental interference in their operation, is
not an inherent repugnance in the nature of the powers themselves.

193

It was also said, that to constitute the power an exclusive one in Congress;
the repugnance must be such, that the State can pass no law on the subject,
which will not be repugnant to the power given to Congress.

194

This required qualification before it could be admitted. Some subjects are, in
their nature, extremely multifarious and complex. The same subject may consist
of a great variety of branches, each extending itself into remote, minute, and
infinite ramifications. One branch alone, of such a subject, might be given
exclusively to Congress, (and the power is exclusive only so far as it is
granted,) yet, on other branches of the same subject, the States might act,
without interfering with the power exclusively granted to Congress. Commerce
is such a subject. It is so complex, multifarious and indefinite, that it
would be extremely difficult, if not impracticable, to make a digest of all
the operations which belong to it. One or more branches of this subject might
be given exclusively to Congress; the others may be left open to the States.
They may, therefore, legislate on commerce, though they cannot touch that
branch which is given exclusively to Congress.

195

So Congress has the power to promote the progress of science and the useful
arts; but only in one mode, viz. by securing, for a limited time, to authors
and inventors, the exclusive right to their respective writings and
discoveries. This might be an exclusive power, and was contended to be so.
Yet, there are a thousand other modes in which the progress of science and the
useful arts may be promoted, as, by establishing and endowing literary and
philosophical societies, and many others which might be mentioned. Hence,
notwithstanding this particular exclusive grant to Congress, of one mode of
promoting the progress of science and the useful arts, the States may
rightfully make many enactments on the general subject, without any repugnance
with the peculiar grant to Congress.

196

But, to come now to the question, whether these State laws be repugnant to
this grant of power, we must first inquire, why it was conferred on Congress?
Why was it thought a matter of sufficient importance to confer this power upon
the national government? The answer to this question would be found in the
history of the country, in the nature of our institutions, and the great
national objects which the constitution had in view. The country was in its
infancy; its population was small; its territory immense: it had recently
thrown off its bondage by the war of the revolution, and was left exhausted
and poor--poor in every thing but virtue and the love of country. It was still
dependent on the arts of Europe, for all the comforts, and almost all the
necessaries of life. We had hardly any manufactures, science, or literature of
our own. Our statesmen saw the great destiny which was before the nation, but
they saw also the necessity of exciting the energies of the people, of
invoking the genius of invention, and of creating and diffusing the lights of
science. These were objects, in which the whole nation was concerned, and
were, therefore, naturally and properly confided to the national government.
The States, indeed, might have exercised their inherent power of legislating
on this subject; but their sphere of action was comparatively small; their
regulations would naturally have been various and conflicting. Discouragement
and discontent would have arisen in some States, from the superior privileges
conferred on the works of genius in others; contests would have ensued among
them on the point of the originality of inventions; and laws of retortion and
reprisal would have followed. All these difficulties would be avoided by
giving the power to Congress, and giving it exclusively of the States. If it
were wisely exerted by Congress, there could be no necessity for a concurrent
exercise of the power by the States.

197

The terms of the grant are, 'Congress shall have power to promote the progress
of science and the useful arts, by securing, for a limited time, to authors
and inventors, the _exclusive_ right to their respective writings and
discoveries.' This exclusive right is to be co-extensive with the territory of
the Union. The laws to be made for securing it, must be uniform, and must
extend throughout the country. The exclusive nature of every power is to be
tested by the character of the acts which Congress is to pass. This is the
case with the naturalization laws. The exclusiveness of the power to establish
them, resulted from their character of uniformity. So here, the exclusiveness
results from the character of the right which they are to confer. It is to be
exclusive. It is not, indeed, said, that Congress shall have the exclusive
power, but it is said that they shall have power to do a certain act, which,
when done, shall be exclusive in its operation. The power to do such an act,
must be an exclusive power. It can, in the nature of things, be performed only
by a single hand. Is not the power of one sovereign to confer _exclusive_
rights, on a given subject, within a certain territory, inconsistent with a
power in another independent sovereign, to confer _exclusive_ rights on the
same subject, in the same territory? Do not the powers clash? The right to be
conferred by Congress, is to exclude all other rights on the subject in the
United States; New-York being one of those States. The right to be conferred
by New-York, is to exclude all other rights on the subject within the State of
New-York. That one right may exclude another, is perfectly intelligible; but
that two rights should reciprocally exclude each other, and yet both continue
to subsist in perfect harmony, is inconceivable. Can a concurrent power exist,
if, from the very nature of its action, it must take away, or render nugatory,
the power given to Congress? Supposing the power to be concurrent, Congress
may secure the right for one period of time, and the respective States for
another. Congress may secure it for the whole Union, and each State may secure
it to a different claimant, for its own territory. Congress possesses the
power of granting an exclusive right to authors and inventors, within the
United States. New-York claims the power to grant such exclusive right within
that State. An author or inventor in that State, may take a grant for a period
of time far longer than that allowed by the act of Congress. He may take a
similar grant from every other State in the Union; and thus this pretended
concurrent power supersedes, abrogates, and annuls the power of Congress. What
would become of the power of Congress after the whole sphere of its action was
taken away by this concurrent power of the States? Who would apply to the
power of Congress for a patent or a copy-right, while the States held up
higher privileges? This concurrent legislation would degenerate into
advertisements for custom. These powers would be in the market, and the
highest bidder would take all. Are not powers repugnant, when one may take
from the other the whole territory on which alone it can act? Is not the
repugnance such as to annihilate the power of Congress, as completely as if
the whole Union was itself annihilated?

198

Something had been said of Congress repealing the laws of the State, wherever
they should conflict with those of the Union. But where is this power of
repeal? There is no such head of power in the constitution. Congress can act
only by positive legislation on any subject, and this it has done in the
present instance. But this action would be in vain, if another authority can
act on the same subject. If this concurrent power would defeat the power of
Congress, by withdrawing from it the whole territory on which it is to act, it
would also defeat it by giving a monopoly of all the elements with which
invention is to work. This has been done by these laws, as to fire and steam.
Why should it not be done equally with all the other elements, such as
gravitation, magnetism, galvanism, electricity, and others? What is to
consecrate these agents of nature, and secure them from State monopoly, more
than fire or steam? If not, then is the power of Congress subject to be
defeated by this concurrent power, first by a monopoly of all the territory on
which it can act, and then by a monopoly of all the elements and natural
agents on which invention can be exerted. Still it would be said, that there
is no direct repugnance between these powers, and that the power of Congress
may still act. But on what can it act? The territory is gone, and all the
powers of invention are appropriated. There is no difference whatever between
a direct enactment, that the law of Congress shall have no operation in New-
York, and enactments which render that operation impossible. If, then, this
process of reasoning be correct, the inevitable conclusion from it is, that a
power in the States to grant _exclusive_ patents, is utterly inconsistent with
the power given to the national government to grant such exclusive patents:
and hence, that the power given to Congress is one which is exclusive from its
nature.

199

But suppose, for the sake of the argument, that the States have this
concurrent power, yet it cannot be denied, that if the legislation of the
State be repugnant to the laws of Congress, that of the State is void, so far
as the repugnance exists. In the present case the repugnance is manifest. The
law of Congress declares, that all inventors of useful improvements throughout
the United States, shall be entitled to the exclusive right in their
discoveries for fourteen years _only_. The law of New-York declares, that this
inventor shall be entitled to the exclusive use of his discovery for thirty
years, and as much longer as the State shall permit. The law of Congress, by
limiting the exclusive right to fourteen years, in effect declares, that after
the expiration of that time, the discovery shall be the common right of the
whole people of the United States. The law of New-York declares that it shall
not, after fourteen years, be the exclusive right of the people of the United
States, but that it shall be the exclusive right of this inventor for thirty
years, and for so much longer as she, in her sovereign will and pleasure, may
permit. If this be not repugnance, direct and palpable, we must have a new
vocabulary for the definition of the word.

200

But it was said, that the appellant had no patent under the United States, and
therefore, could not raise the question. To this it was answered, that it was
not necessary that he should have a patent. The question as to the validity of
the law of New-York, is raised, whenever a right is asserted under that law,
and is resisted by the party against whom it is asserted; and that validity is
to be tested, not by comparing the law of New-York with a patent, but by
comparing it with the constitution and laws of the United States.

201

It was also said, that there could be no repugnance, because it was admitted,
that wherever a patent from the United States appears, the patent obtained
under the State law must yield to it; that the patent under the State is valid
only until the patent from the paramount power appears; and that the rights
derived from the different sovereigns must be found practically to clash,
before the law of New-York was to give way for repugnancy. This is an
insidious argument, and fraught with all the dangers which have been
enumerated. For if the New-York patentee be the inventor, the law of New-York
is absolute, and however unconstitutional it may be, there is no power of
resistance. Besides, the argument is incorrect. To illustrate this, suppose a
grant from Virginia, within the military reservation in Ohio, after she had
ceded the whole territory to the United States; would the party in possession,
even if a mere intruder, be bound to show a grant from the United States,
before he could resist the unlawful grant of Virginia? But there the plaintiff
would be claiming under a State which had previously ceded away the power to
make such grants, which is precisely the case here, so that there need be no
repugnance arising from patents. If a repugnance exist between the laws of
New-York and the constitution and laws of the United States, any citizen of
the United States has a right to act as if the law of New-York were a nullity;
and the question of its nullity and validity arises, wherever an attempt is
made to enforce it.

202

But it was argued that the power of Congress is limited to inventors, and that
the power to encourage by patents the introduction of foreign discoveries,
stands clear of this constitutional grant. If it were necessary, this doctrine
might be questioned. The statute of the 21st James I. c. 3. uses the same word
with the constitution, 'inventors;' and the decisions upon the construction of
this statute might be referred to, in order to show that it has been
considered as embracing discoveries imported from abroad.89 But, even acceding
to this doctrine, it might be asked whether the question now before the Court
had any thing to do with an art, machine, or improvement, imported from
abroad? The privilege here granted by the State, is to an American citizen,
who claims to be the inventor. The privilege is the reward of invention, not
of importation, and this it is which brings it in conflict with the act of
Congress. It is true, the law does not call him the inventor; it calls him
merely the 'possessor.' But, can the constitution and laws of the United
States be evaded in this manner? If he was not the inventor, why this unjust
tax which has been levied upon our admiration and gratitude? When the validity
of a law is challenged for a fraudulent evasion of the rights of others, you
are not bound by its own averments, but may resort to proof _aliunde_ to
establish the facts. The word _possessor_ is a new and unusual word to apply
to such a case, and marks a studious effort to conceal the truth. He was, of
necessity, either the inventor or the importer. If he was the _importer_ ,
there is no conceivable reason why he should be called by any other than that
name. The Legislature of New-York, in its act in behalf of Fitch, passed
before the adoption of the constitution, had no difficulty in applying the
natural and appropriate name to him. But when the final law was passed in
favour of Livingston and Fulton, in 1798, the constitution of the United
States, which cedes this power to Congress, had been adopted, and the laws by
which that power is executed had been passed. This constitution and these laws
used the term _inventors_. But the privilege was too short. The State of New-
York offered better terms. The only difficulty was, to give them effect
without encroaching upon that power which had been constitutionally exercised
by Congress. It would not do to call them _inventors_ , and the device was
adopted of calling him merely the _possessor_ , which was a manifest evasion
of the law of Congress.

203

But it was contended, that the patent laws of the United States give no right;
they only secure a pre-existing right at common law. What then do these
statutes accomplish? If they do nothing more than give the inventor a chattel
interest in his invention, and a remedy for its violation, he had these at
common law. And if they only give him a mere right to use his invention in the
States, with their permission, he had that before. The case of _Millar v.
Taylor_ proves the right to have been perfect at common law. The time of
enjoyment was far greater. Thompson's Seasons had been published forty years
when that action was brought. If the patent and copy-right laws were merely
intended to secure an exclusive right throughout the United States, and are,
in fact, a limitation on the common law right, (as was contended by the
respondent's counsel,) when this right has been thus secured throughout the
United States, and a limitation constitutionally put upon it by Congress, can
a State interfere with this regulation? The limitation is not for the
advantage of the inventor, but of society at large, which is to take the
benefit of the invention after the period of limitation has expired. The
patentee pays a duty on his patent, which is an effective source of revenue to
the United States. It is virtually a contract between each patentee and the
people of the United States, by which the time of exclusive and secure
enjoyment is limited, and then the benefit of the discovery results to the
public. A State cannot, by its local laws, dereat this resulting interest of
the whole Union.

204

But it was said that a State might prohibit the use of a patented machine, if
it be noxious to the health of its citizens, or of an immoral or impious book,
the copy-right of which had been secured. The answer to all such arguments
was, that it would be time enough to consider such questions when they arise.
The constitutional power of Congress is to patent _useful_ discoveries. The
patent authorizes the patentee to _use_ his invention, and it is the use which
is secured. When a discovery is deemed _useful_ by the national government,
and a patent shall issue authorizing the patentee to use it throughout the
United States, and the patentee shall be obstructed by a State in the exercise
of this right, on the ground that the discovery is useless and dangerous, it
will be time enough to consider the power of the States to defeat the exercise
of the right on this ground. But this is not the question before the Court. It
might be admitted, that the State had authority to prohibit the use of a
patented machine on that ground, or of a book, the copy-right of which had
been secured, on the ground of its impiety or immorality. But the laws which
are now in judgment were not passed upon any such ground. The question raised
by them is, can the States obstruct the operation of an act of Congress, by
taking the power from the National Legislature into their own hands? Can they
prohibit the publication of an immoral book, licensed by Congress, on the
pretext of its immorality, and then give an exclusive right to publish the
same book themselves? Can they prohibit the use of an invention on the ground
of its noxiousness, and then authorize the exclusive use of the same invention
by their own law?

205

But there is no pretext of noxiousness here. The authority to enact these laws
is taken up under a totally distinct head of State power. It is the sovereign
power to grant exclusive privileges and create monopolies, the constitution
and laws of the United States to the contrary notwithstanding. This is the
real power under which these laws are defended; and it may perplex, although
it cannot enlighten the discussion, to confound it with another and a distinct
head of State power. If then the power of securing to authors and inventors
the use of their writings and discoveries, be exclusively vested in Congress,
the acts of New-York are void, because they are founded on the exercise of the
same power by the State. And if the power be concurrent, these acts are still
void, because they interfere with the legislation of Congress on the same
subject.

206

These laws were also void, because they interfere with the power given to
Congress, to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several
States. This nullity of the State laws would be supported, first, upon the
ground of the power being exclusive in Congress; and, secondly, that if
concurrent, these laws directly interfered with those of Congress on the same
subject.

207

That this power was exclusive, would be manifest from the fact, that the
commerce to be regulated, was that of the United States; that the government
by which it was to be regulated, was also that of the United States; and that
the subject itself was one undivided subject. It was an entire, regular, and
uniform system, which was to be carried into effect, and would not admit of
the participation and interference of another hand. Does not regulation, _ex
vi termini_ , imply harmony and uniformity of action? If this must be admitted
to be the natural and proper force of the term, let us suppose that the
additional term, _uniform_ , had been introduced into the constitution, so as
to provide that Congress should have power to make uniform regulations of
commerce throughout the United States. Then, according to the adjudications on
the power of establishing a uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws
of bankruptcy, throughout the United States, this power would unquestionably
have been exclusive in Congress. But _regulation_ of that commerce which
pervades the Union, necessarily implies _uniformity_ , and the same result,
therefore, follows as if the word had been inserted.

208

With regard to the quarantine laws, and other regulations of police,
respecting the public health in the several States, they do not partake of the
character of regulations of the commerce of the United States. It had been
said, that these local regulations were recognised by Congress, which had made
them a part of its own system of commerce. But this recognition would have
been superfluous, if they could have stood without it on the basis of State
sovereignty; and so far as their adoption by Congress could be considered as
affeeting the question, the manner and purpose of the recognition operated the
other way. It would be found that, by the commercial regulations which
Congress had made, a general system was adopted, which, if executed in every
instance, would have carried ships and vessels into all the ports of the
several States, their local quarantine laws to the contrary notwithstanding.
An express regulation is, therefore, introduced, requiring the collectors of
the customs to conform the execution of their official duties, under the
navigation and revenue laws, with the quarantine laws of the respective
States. Without such a provision, the local health laws must have given way to
the supremacy of the navigation and revenue laws of the Union.

209

A serious objection to the exclusive nature of this power of regulating
commerce, was supposed to arise from the express prohibitions on the States,
contained in the 10th sec. of the 1st art. of the constitution. It has been
considered, that these prohibitions imply that, as to every thing not
prohibited, the power of the State was meant to be reserved; and the authority
of the authors of the _Fedcralist_ , was cited in support of this
interpretation. But another commentator, of hardly less imposing authority,
and writing, not as a polemic, for the purpose of vindicating the constitution
against popular objections, but for the mere purpose of didactic instruction
as a professor, with this section before him, and with a strong leaning
towards State pretensions, considers the power to regulate commerce as an
exclusive power.90 But the difference between them is rather in appearance,
than in reality. It does not appear that the author of that number of the
_Federalist_ , did himself consider these police regulations as, properly
speaking, regulations of the commerce of the Union. But the objectors to the
constitution had presented them as such, and his argument in substance is,
that if they are, the constitution does not affect them. The other commentator
did not consider them as regulations of the commerce of the United States; for
if he did, he could not admit them, as he did, to be left in the States, and
yet hold the opinion that the power to regulate commerce was exclusively
vested in Congress. But might not a reason for these prohibitions be found, in
the recent experience of the country, very different from that which had
heretofore been assigned for them. The acts prohibited, were precisely those
which the States had been passing, and which mainly led to the adoption of the
constitution. The section might have been inserted _ex abundanti cautela_. Or
the convention might have regarded the previous clause, which grants the power
to regulate commerce, as exclusive throughout the whole subject; and this
section might have been inserted to qualify its exclusive character, so far as
to permit the States to do the things mentioned, under the superintendance and
with the consent of Congress. If either or both of these motives combined for
inserting the clause, the inference which had been drawn from it against the
exclusive power of Congress to regulate commerce, would appear to be wholly
unwarranted.

210

But if these police regulations of the States are to be considered as a part
of the immense mass of commercial powers, is not the subject susceptible of
division, and may not some portions of it be exclusively vested in Congress?
It was viewing the subject in this light, that induced his learned associate91
to assume the position which had been misconceived on the other side. This
proposition was, not that all the commercial powers are exclusive, but that
those powers being separated, there are some which are exclusive in their
nature; and among them, is that power which concerns navigation, and which
prescribes the vehicles in which commerce shall be carried on. It was,
however, immaterial, so far as this case was concerned, whether the power of
Congress to regulate commerce be exclusive or concurrent. Supposing it to be
concurrent, it could not be denied, that where Congress has legislated
concerning a subject, on which it is authorized to act, all State legislation
which interferes with it, is absolutely void. It was not denied, that Congress
has power to regulate the coasting trade. It was not denied that Congress had
regulated it. If the vessel now in question, was sailing under the authority
of these regulations, and has been arrested by a law of New-York forbidding
her sailing, the State law must, of necessity, be void. The coasting trade
did, indeed, exist before the constitution was adopted; it might safely be
admitted, that it existed by the _jus commune_ of nations; that it existed by
an imperfect right; and that the States might prohibit or permit it at their
pleasure, imposing upon it any regulations they thought fit, within the limits
of their respective territorial jurisdictions. But those regulations were as
various as the States; continually conflicting, and the source of perpetual
discord and confusion. In this condition, the constitution found the coasting
trade. It was not a thing which required to be created, for it already
existed. But it was a thing which demanded regulation, and the power of
regulating it was given to Congress. They acted upon it as an existing
subject, and regulated it in a uniform manner throughout the Union. After this
regulation, it was no longer an imperfect right, subject to the future control
of the States. It became a perfect right, protected by the laws of Congress,
with which the States had no authority to interfere. It was for the very
purpose of putting an end to this interference, that the power was given to
Congress; and if they still have a right to act upon the subject, the power
was given in vain. To say that Congress shall regulate it, and et to say that
the States shall alter these regulations at pleasure, or disregard them
altogether, would be to say, in the same breath, that Congress shall regulate
it, and shall not regulate it; to give the power with one hand, and to take it
back with the other. By the acts for regulating the coasting trade, Congress
had defined what should be required to authorize a vessel to trade from port
to port; and in this definition, not one word is said as to whether it is
moved by sails or by fire; whether it carries passengers or merchandise. The
license gives the authority to sail, without any of those qualifications. That
the regulation of commerce and navigation, includes the authority of
regulating passenger vessels as well as others, would appear from the most
approved definitions of the term _commerce_. It always implies
intercommunication and intercourse. This is the sense in which the
constitution uses it; and the great national object was, to regulate the terms
on which intercourse between foreigners and this country, and between the
different States of the Union, should be carried on. If freight be the test of
commerce, this vessel was earning freight; for what is freight, but the
compensation paid for the use of a ship? The compensation for the carrying of
passengers may be insured as freight. The whole subject is regulated by the
general commercial law; and Congress has superadded special regulations
applicable to vessels employed in transporting passengers from Europe. In none
of the acts regulating the navigation of the country, whether employed in the
foreign or coasting trade, had any allusion been made to the kind of vehicles
employed, further than the general description of ships or vessels, nor to the
means or agents by which they were propelled.

211

In conclusion, the _Attorney-General_ obscrved, that his learned friend (Mr.
Emmett) had eloquently personified the State of New-York, casting her eyes
over the ocean, witnessing every where this triumph of her genius, and
exclaiming, in the language of AEneas,

212

'Quae regio in terris, nostri non plena laboris?'

213

Sir, it was not in the moment of triumph, nor with feelings of triumph, that
AEneas uttered that exclamation. It was when, with his faithful Achates by his
side, he was surveying the works of art with which the palace of Carthage was
adorned, and his attention had been caught by a representation of the battles
of Troy. There he saw the sons of Atreus and Priam, and the fierce Achilles.
The whole extent of his misfortunes--the loss and desolation of his friends--
the fall of his beloved country, rush upon his recollection.

214

'Constitit, et _lachrymans;_ Quis jam locus, inquit, Achate, Quae regio in
terris nostri non plena laboris?'

215

Sir, the passage may, hereafter, have a closer application to the cause than
my eloquent and classical friend intended. For, if the state of things which
has already commenced is to go on; if the spirit of hostility, which already
exists in three of our States, is to catch by contagion, and spread among the
rest, as, from the progress of the human passions, and the unavoidable
conflict of interests, it will too surely do, what are we to expect? Civil
wars have often arisen from far inferior causes, and have desolated some of
the fairest provinces of the earth. History is full of the afflicting
narratives of such wars, from causes far inferior; and it will continue to be
her mournful office to record them, till time shall be no more. It is a
momentous decision which this Court is called on to make. Here are three
States almost on the eve of war. It is the high province of this Court to
interpose its benign and mediatorial influence. The framers of our admirable
constitution would have deserved the wreath of immortality which they have
acquired, had they done nothing else than to establish this guardian tribunal,
to harmonize the jarring elements in our system. But, sir, if you do not
interpose your friendly hand, and extirpate the seeds of anarchy which New-
York has sown, you _will_ have civil war. The war of legislation, which has
already commenced, will, according to its usual course, become a war of blows.
Your country will be shaken with civil strife. Your republican institutions
will perish in the conflict. Your constitution will fall. The last hope of
nations will be gone. And, what will be the effect upon the rest of the world?
Look abroad at the scenes which are now passing on our globe, and judge of
that effect. The friends of free government throughout the earth, who have
been heretofore animated by our example, and have held it up before them as
their polar star, to guide them through the stormy seas of revolution, will
witness our fall _with dismay and despair_. The arm that is every where lifted
in the cause of liberty, will drop, unnerved, by the warrior's side. Despotism
will have its day of triumph, and will accomplish the purpose at which it too
certainly aims. It will cover the earth with the mantle of mourning. Then,
sir, when New-York shall look upon this scene of ruin, if she have the
generous feelings which I believe her to have, it will not be with her head
aloft, in the pride of conscious triumph--'her rapt soul sitting in her eyes;'
no, sir, no: dejected, with shame and confusion--drooping under the weight of
her sorrow, with a voice suffocated with despair, _well_ may _she then_
exclaim,

216

'Quis jam locus, Quae regio in terris nostri non plena laboris!'

_March_ 2.

217

Mr. Chief Justice MARSHALL delivered the opinion of the Court, and, after
stating the case, proceeded as follows:

218

The appellant contends that this decree is erroneous, because the laws which
purport to give the exclusive privilege it sustains, are repugnant to the
constitution and laws of the United States.

219

They are said to be repugnant----

220

1st. To that clause in the constitution which authorizes Congress to regulate
commerce.

221

2d. To that which authorizes Congress to promote the progress of science and
useful arts.

222

The State of New-York maintains the constitutionality of these laws; and their
Legislature, their Council of Revision, and their Judges, have repeatedly
concurred in this opinion. It is supported by great names--by names which have
all the titles to consideration that virtue, intelligence, and office, can
bestow. No tribunal can approach the decision of this question, without
feeling a just and real respect for that opinion which is sustained by such
authority; but it is the province of this Court, while it respects, not to bow
to it implicitly; and the Judges must exercise, in the examination of the
subject, that understanding which Providence has bestowed upon them, with that
independence which the people of the United States expect from this department
of the government.

223

As preliminary to the very able discussions of the constitution, which we have
heard from the bar, and as having some influence on its construction,
reference has been made to the political situation of these States, anterior
to its formation. It has been said, that they were sovereign, were completely
independent, and were connected with each other only by a league. This is
true. But, when these allied sovereigns converted their league into a
government, when they converted their Congress of Ambassadors, deputed to
deliberate on their common concerns, and to recommend measures of general
utility, into a Legislature, empowered to enact laws on the most interesting
subjects, the whole character in which the States appear, underwent a change,
the extent of which must be determined by a fair consideration of the
instrument by which that change was effected.

224

This instrument contains an enumeration of powers expressly granted by the
people to their government. It has been said, that these powers ought to be
construed strictly. But why ought they to be so construed? Is there one
sentence in the constitution which gives countenance to this rule? In the last
of the enumerated powers, that which grants, expressly, the means for carrying
all others into execution, Congress is authorized 'to make all laws which
shall be necessary and proper' for the purpose. But this limitation on the
means which may be used, is not extended to the powers which are conferred;
nor is there one sentence in the constitution, which has been pointed out by
the gentlemen of the bar, or which we have been able to discern, that
prescribes this rule. We do not, therefore, think ourselves justified in
adopting it. What do gentlemen mean, by a strict construction? If they contend
only against that enlarged construction, which would extend words beyond their
natural and obvious import, we might question the application of the term, but
should not controvert the principle. If they contend for that narrow
construction which, in support or some theory not to be found in the
constitution, would deny to the government those powers which the words of the
grant, as usually understood, import, and which are consistent with the
general views and objects of the instrument; for that narrow construction,
which would cripple the government, and render it unequal to the object for
which it is declared to be instituted, and to which the powers given, as
fairly understood, render it competent; then we cannot perceive the propriety
of this strict construction, nor adopt it as the rule by which the
constitution is to be expounded. As men, whose intentions require no
concealment, generally employ the words which most directly and aptly express
the ideas they intend to convey, the enlightened patriots who framed our
constitution, and the people who adopted it, must be understood to have
employed words in their natural sense, and to have intended what they have
said. If, from the imperfection of human language, there should be serious
doubts respecting the extent of any given power, it is a well settled rule,
that the objects for which it was given, especially when those ob jects are
expressed in the instrument itself, should have great influence in the
construction. We know of no reason for excluding this rule from the present
case. The grant does not convey power which might be beneficial to the
grantor, if retained by himself, or which can enure solely to the benefit of
the grantee; but is an investment of power for the general advantage, in the
hands of agents selected for that purpose; which power can never be exercised
by the people themselves, but must be placed in the hands of agents, or lie
dormant. We know of no rule for construing the extent of such powers, other
than is given by the language of the instrument which confers them, taken in
connexion with the purposes for which they were conferred.

225

The words are, 'Congress shall have power to regulate commerce with foreign
nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian tribes.'

226

The subject to be regulated is commerce; and our constitution being, as was
aptly said at the bar, one of enumeration, and not of definition, to ascertain
the extent of the power, it becomes necessary to settle the meaning of the
word. The counsel for the appellee would limit it to traffic, to buying and
selling, or the interchange of commodities, and do not admit that it
comprehends navigation. This would restrict a general term, applicable to many
objects, to one of its significations. Commerce, undoubtedly, is traffic, but
it is something more: it is intercourse. It describes the commercial
intercourse between nations, and parts of nations, in all its branches, and is
regulated by prescribing rules for carrying on that intercourse. The mind can
scarcely conceive a system for regulating commerce between nations, which
shall exclude all laws concerning navigation, which shall be silent on the
admission of the vessels of the one nation into the ports of the other, and be
confined to prescribing rules for the conduct of individuals, in the actual
employment of buying and selling, or of barter.

227

If commerce does not include navigation, the government of the Union has no
direct power over that subject, and can make no law prescribing what shall
constitute American vessels, or requiring that they shall be navigated by
American seamen. Yet this power has been exercised from the commencement of
the government, has been exercised with the consent of all, and has been
understood by all to be a commercial regulation. All America understands, and
has uniformly understood, the word 'commerce,' to comprehend navigation. It
was so understood, and must have been so understood, when the constitution was
framed. The power over commerce, including navigation, was one of the primary
objects for which the people of America adopted their government, and must
have been contemplated in forming it. The convention must have used the word
in that sense, because all have understood it in that sense; and the attempt
to restrict it comes too late.

228

If the opinion that 'commerce,' as the word is used in the constitution,
comprehends navigation also, requires any additional confirmation, that
additional confirmation is, we think, furnished by the words of the instrument
itself.

229

It is a rule of construction, acknowledged by all, that the exceptions from a
power mark its extent; for it would be absurd, as well as useless, to except
from a granted power, that which was not granted--that which the words of the
grant could not comprehend. If, then, there are in the constitution plain
exceptions from the power over navigation, plain inhibitions to the exercise
of that power in a particular way, it is a proof that those who made these
exceptions, and prescribed these inhibitions, understood the power to which
they applied as being granted.

230

The 9th section of the 1st article declares, that 'no preference shall be
given, by any regulation of commerce or revenue, to the ports of one State
over those of another.' This clause cannot be understood as applicable to
those laws only which are passed for the purposes of revenue, because it is
expressly applied to commercial regulations; and the most obvious preference
which can be given to one port over another, in regulating commerce, relates
to navigation. But the subsequent part of the sentence is still more exphicit.
It is, 'nor shall vessels bound to or from one State, be obliged to enter,
clear, or pay duties, in another.' These words have a direct reference to
navigation.

231

The universally acknowledged power of the government to impose embargoes, must
also be considered as showing, that all America is united in that construction
which comprehends navigation in the word commerce. Gentlemen have said, in
argument, that this is a branch of the war-making power, and that an embargo
is an instrument of war, not a regulation of trade.

232

That it may be, and often is, used as an instrument of war, cannot be denied.
An embargo may be imposed for the purpose of facilitating the equipment or
manning of a fleet, or for the purpose of concealing the progress of an
expedition preparing to sail from a particular port. In these, and in similar
cases, it is a military instrument, and partakes of the nature of war. But all
embargoes are not of this description. They are sometimes resorted to without
a view to war, and with a single view to commerce. In such case, an embargo is
no more a war measure, than a merchantman is a ship of war, because both are
vessels which navigate the ocean with sails and seamen.

233

When Congress imposed that embargo which, for a time, engaged the attention of
every man in the United States, the avowed object of the law was, the
protection of commerce, and the avoiding of war. By its friends and its
enemies it was treated as a commercial, not as a war measure. The persevering
earnestness and zeal with which it was opposed, in a part of our country which
supposed its interests to be vitally affected by the act, cannot be forgotten.
A want of acuteness in discovering objections to a measure to which they felt
the most deep rooted hostility, will not be imputed to those who were arrayed
in opposition to this. Yet they never suspected that navigation was no branch
of trade, and was, therefore, not comprehended in the power to regulate
commerce. They did, indeed, contest the constitutionality of the act, but, on
a principle which admits the construction for which the appellant contends.
They denied that the particular law in question was made in pursuance of the
constitution, not because the power could not act directly on vessels, but
because a perpetual embargo was the annihilation, and not the regulation of
commerce. In terms, they admitted the applicability of the words used in the
constitution to vessels; and that, in a case which produced a degree and an
extent of excitement, calculated to draw forth every principle on which
legitimate resistance could be sustained. No example could more strongly
illustrate the universal understanding of the American people on this subject.

234

The word used in the constitution, then, comprehends, and has been always
understood to comprehend, navigation within its meaning; and a power to
regulate navigation, is as expressly granted, as if that term had been added
to the word 'commerce.'

235

To what commerce does this power extend? The constitution informs us, to
commerce 'with foreign nations, and among the several States, and with the
Indian tribes.'

236

It has, we believe, been universally admitted, that these words comprehend
every species of commercial intercourse between the United States and foreign
nations. No sort of trade can be carried on between this country and any
other, to which this power does not extend. It has been truly said, that
commerce, as the word is used in the constitution, is a unit, every part of
which is indicated by the term.

237

If this be the admitted meaning of the word, in its application to foreign
nations, it must carry the same meaning throughout the sentence, and remain a
unit, unless there be some plain intelligible cause which alters it.

238

The subject to which the power is next applied, is to commerce 'among the
several States.' The word 'among' means intermingled with. A thing which is
among others, is intermingled with them. Commerce among the States, cannot
stop at the external boundary line of each State, but may be introduced into
the interior.

239

It is not intended to say that these words comprehend that commerce, which is
completely internal, which is carried on between man and man in a State, or
between different parts of the same State, and which does not extend to or
affect other States. Such a power would be inconvenient, and is certainly
unnecessary.

240

Comprehensive as the word 'among' is, it may very properly be restricted to
that commerce which concerns more States than one. The phrase is not one which
would probably have been selected to indicate the completely interior traffic
of a State, because it is not an apt phrase for that purpose; and the
enumeration of the particular classes of commerce, to which the power was to
be extended, would not have been made, had the intention been to extend the
power to every description. The enumeration presupposes something not
enumerated; and that something, if we regard the language or the subject of
the sentence, must be the exclusively internal commerce of a State. The genius
and character of the whole government seem to be, that its action is to be
applied to all the external concerns of the nation, and to those internal
concerns which affect the States generally; but not to those which are
completely within a particular State, which do not affect other States, and
with which it is not necessary to interfere, for the purpose of executing some
of the general powers of the government. The completely internal commerce of a
State, then, may be considered as reserved for the State itself.

241

But, in regulating commerce with foreign nations, the power of Congress does
not stop at the jurisdictional lines of the several States. It would be a very
useless power, if it could not pass those lines. The commerce of the United
States with foreign nations, is that of the whole United States. Every
district has a right to participate in it. The deep streams which penetrate
our country in every direction, pass through the interior of almost every
State in the Union, and furnish the means of exercising this right. If
Congress has the power to regulate it, that power must be exercised whenever
the subject exists. If it exists within the States, if a foreign voyage may
commence or terminate at a port within a State, then the power of Congress may
be exercised within a State.

242

This principle is, if possible, still more clear, when applied to commerce
'among the several States.' They either join each other, in which case they
are separated by a mathematical line, or they are remote from each other, in
which case other States lie between them. What is commerce 'among' them; and
how is it to be conducted? Can a trading expedition between two adjoining
States, commence and terminate outside of each? And if the trading intercourse
be between two States remote from each other, must it not commence in one,
terminate in the other, and probably pass through a third? Commerce among the
States must, of necessity, be commerce with the States. In the regulation of
trade with the Indian tribes, the action of the law, especially when the
constitution was made, was chiefly within a State. The power of Congress,
then, whatever it may be, must be exercised within the territorial
jurisdiction of the several States. The sense of the nation on this subject,
is unequivocally manifested by the provisions made in the laws for
transporting goods, by land, between Baltimore and Providence, between New-
York and Philadelphia, and between Philadelphia and Baltimore.

243

We are now arrived at the inquiry--What is this power?

244

It is the power to regulate; that is, to prescribe the rule by which commerce
is to be governed. This power, like all others vested in Congress, is complete
in itself, may be exercised to its utmost extent, and acknowledges no
limitations, other than are prescribed in the constitution. These are
expressed in plain terms, and do not affect the questions which arise in this
case, or which have been discussed at the bar. If, as has always been
understood, the sovereignty of Congress, though limited to specified objects,
is plenary as to those objects, the power over commerce with foreign nations,
and among the several States, is vested in Congress as absolutely as it would
be in a single government, having in its constitution the same restrictions on
the exercise of the power as are found in the constitution of the United
States. The wisdom and the discretion of Congress, their identity with the
people, and the influence which their constituents possess at elections, are,
in this, as in many other instances, as that, for example, of declaring war,
the sole restraints on which they have relied, to secure them from its abuse.
They are the restraints on which the people must often they solely, in all
representative governments.

245

The power of Congress, then, comprehends navigation, within the limits of
every State in the Union; so far as that navigation may be, in any manner,
connected with 'commerce with foreign nations, or among the several States, or
with the Indian tribes.' It may, of consequence, pass the jurisdictional line
of New-York, and act upon the very waters to which the prohibition now under
consideration applies.

246

But it has been urged with great earnestness, that, although the power of
Congress to regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several
States, be co-extensive with the subject itself, and have no other limits than
are prescribed in the constitution, yet the States may severally exercise the
same power, within their respective jurisdictions. In support of this
argument, it is said, that they possessed it as an inseparable attribute of
sovereignty, before the formation of the constitution, and still retain it,
except so far as they have surrendered it by that instrument; that this
principle results from the nature of the government, and is secured by the
tenth amendment; that an affirmative grant of power is not exclusive, unless
in its own nature it be such that the continued exercise of it by the former
possessor is inconsistent with the grant, and that this is not of that
description.

247

The appellant, conceding these postulates, except the last, contends, that
full power to regulate a particular subject, implies the whole power, and
leaves no residuum; that a grant of the whole is incompatible with the
existence of a right in another to any part of it.

248

Both parties have appealed to the constitution, to legislative acts, and
judicial decisions; and have drawn arguments from all these sources, to
support and illustrate the propositions they respectively maintain.

249

The grant of the power to lay and collect taxes is, like the power to regulate
commerce, made in general terms, and has never been understood to interfere
with the exercise of the same power by the State; and hence has been drawn an
argument which has been applied to the question under consideration. But the
two grants are not, it is conceived, similar in their terms or their nature.
Although many of the powers formerly exercised by the States, are transferred
to the government of the Union, yet the State governments remain, and
constitute a most important part of our system. The power of taxation is
indispensable to their existence, and is a power which, in its own nature, is
capable of residing in, and being exercised by, different authorities at the
same time. We are accustomed to see it placed, for different purposes, in
different hands. Taxation is the simple operation of taking small portions
from a perpetually accumulating mass, susceptible of almost infinite division;
and a power in one to take what is necessary for certain purposes, is not, in
its nature, incompatible with a power in another to take what is necessary for
other purposes. Congress is authorized to lay and collect taxes, &c. to pay
the debts, and provide for the common defence and general welfare of the
United States. This does not interfere with the power of the States to tax for
the support of their own governments; nor is the exercise of that power by the
States, an exercise of any portion of the power that is granted to the United
States. In imposing taxes for State purposes, they are not doing what Congress
is empowered to do. Congress is not empowered to tax for those purposes which
are within the exclusive province of the States. When, then, each government
exercises the power of taxation, neither is exercising the power of the other.
But, when a State proceeds to regulate commerce with foreign nations, or among
the several States, it is exercising the very power that is granted to
Congress, and is doing the very thing which Congress is authorized to do.
There is no analogy, then, between the power of taxation and the power of
regulating commerce.

250

In discussing the question, whether this power is still in the States, in the
case under consideration, we may dismiss from it the inquiry, whether it is
surrendered by the mere grant to Congress, or is retained until Congress shall
exercise the power. We may dismiss that inquiry, because it has been
exercised, and the regulations which Congress deemed it proper to make, are
now in full operation. The sole question is, can a State regulate commerce
with foreign nations and among the States, while Congress is regulating it?

251

The counsel for the respondent answer this question in the affirmative, and
rely very much on the restrictions in the 10th section, as supporting their
opinion. They say, very truly, that limitations of a power, furnish a strong
argument in favour of the existence of that power, and that the section which
prohibits the States from laying duties on imports or exports, proves that
this power might have been exercised, had it not been expressly forbidden;
and, consequently, that any other commercial regulation, not expressly
forbidden, to which the original power of the State was competent, may still
be made.

252

That this restriction shows the opinion of the Convention, that a State might
impose duties on exports and imports, if not expressly forbidden, will be
conceded; but that it follows as a consequence, from this concession, that a
State may regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the States, cannot
be admitted.

253

We must first determine whether the act of laying 'duties or imposts on
imports or exports,' is considered in the constitution as a branch of the
taxing power, or of the power to regulate commerce. We think it very clear,
that it is considered as a branch of the taxing power. It is so treated in the
first clause of the 8th section: 'Congress shall have power to lay and collect
taxes, duties, imposts, and excises;' and, before commerce is mentioned, the
rule by which the exercise of this power must be governed, is declared. It is,
that all duties, imposts, and excises, shall be uniform. In a separate clause
of the enumeration, the power to regulate commerce is given, as being entirely
distinct from the right to levy taxes and imposts, and as being a new power,
not before conferred. The constitution, then, considers these powers as
substantive, and distinct from each other; and so places them in the
enumeration it contains. The power of imposing duties on imports is classed
with the power to levy taxes, and that seems to be its natural place. But the
power to levy taxes could never be considered as abridging the right of the
States on that subject; and they might, consequently, have exercised it by
levying duties on imports or exports, had the constitution contained no
prohibition on this subject. This prohibition, then, is an exception from the
acknowledged power of the States to levy taxes, not from the questionable
power to regulate commerce.

254

'A duty of tonnage' is as much a tax, as a duty on imports or exports; and the
reason which induced the prohibition of those taxes, extends to this also.
This tax may be imposed by a State, with the consent of Congress; and it may
be admitted, that Congress cannot give a right to a State, in virtue of its
own powers. But a duty of tonnage being part of the power of imposing taxes,
its prohibition may certainly be made to depend on Congress, without affording
any implication respecting a power to regulate commerce. It is true, that
duties may often be, and in fact often are, imposed on tonnage, with a view to
the regulation of commerce; but they may be also imposed with a view to
revenue; and it was, therefore, a prudent precaution, to prohibit the States
from exercising this power. The idea that the same measure might, according to
circumstances, be arranged with different classes of power, was no novelty to
the framers of our constitution. Those illustrious statesmen and patriots had
been, many of them, deeply engaged in the discussions which preceded the war
of our revolution, and all of them were well read in those discussions. The
right to regulate commerce, even by the imposition of duties, was not
controverted; but the right to impose a duty for the purpose of revenue,
produced a war as important, perhaps, in its consequences to the human race,
as any the world has ever witnessed.

255

These restrictions, then, are on the taxing power, not on that to regulate
commerce; and presuppose the existence of that which they restrain, not of
that which they do not purport to restrain.

256

But, the inspection laws are said to be regulations of commerce, and are
certainly recognised in the constitution, as being passed in the exercise of a
power remaining with the States.

257

That inspection laws may have a remote and considerable influence on commerce,
will not be denied; but that a power to regulate commerce is the source from
which the right to pass them is derived, cannot be admitted. The object of
inspection laws, is to improve the quality of articles produced by the labour
of a country; to fit them for exportation; or, it may be, for domestic use.
They act upon the subject before it becomes an article of foreign commerce, or
of commerce among the States, and prepare it for that purpose. They form a
portion of that immense mass of legislation, which embraces every thing within
the territory of a State, not surrendered to the general government: all which
can be most advantageously exercised by the States themselves. Inspection
laws, quarantine laws, health laws of every description, as well as laws for
regulating the internal commerce of a State, and those which respect turnpike
roads, ferries, &c., are component parts of this mass.

258

No direct general power over these objects is granted to Congress; and,
consequently, they remain subject to State legislation. If the legislative
power of the Union can reach them, it must be for national purposes; it must
be where the power is expressly given for a special purpose, or is clearly
incidental to some power which is expressly given. It is obvious, that the
government of the Union, in the exercise of its express powers, that, for
example, of regulating commerce with foreign nations and among the States, may
use means that may also be employed by a State, in the exercise of its
acknowledged powers; that, for example, of regulating commerce within the
State. If Congress license vessels to sail from one port to another, in the
same State, the act is supposed to be, necessarily, incidental to the power
expressly granted to Congress, and implies no claim of a direct power to
regulate the purely internal commerce of a State, or to act directly on its
system of police. So, if a State, in passing laws on subjects acknowledged to
be within its control, and with a view to those subjects, shall adopt a
measure of the same character with one which Congress may adopt, it does not
derive its authority from the particular power which has been granted, but
from some other, which remains with the State, and may be executed by the same
means. All experience shows, that the same measures, or measures scarcely
distinguishable from each other, may flow from distinct powers; but this does
not prove that the powers themselves are identical. Although the means used in
their execution may sometimes approach each other so nearly as to be
confounded, there are other situations in which they are sufficiently distinct
to establish their individuality.

259

In our complex system, presenting the rare and difficult scheme of one general
government, whose action extends over the whole, but which possesses only
certain enumerated powers; and of numerous State governments, which retain and
exercise all powers not delegated to the Union, contests respecting power must
arise. Were it even otherwise, the measures taken by the respective
governments to execute their acknowledged powers, would often be of the same
description, and might, sometimes, interfere. This, however, does not prove
that the one is exercising, or has a right to exercise, the powers of the
other.

260

The acts of Congress, passed in 1796 and 1799,92 empowering and directing the
officers of the general government to conform to, and assist in the execution
of the quarantine and health laws of a State, proceed, it is said, upon the
idea that these laws are constitutional. It is undoubtedly true, that they do
proceed upon that idea; and the constitutionality of such laws has never, so
far as we are informed, been denied. But they do not imply an acknowledgment
that a State may rightfully regulate commerce with foreign nations, or among
the States; for they do not imply that such laws are an exercise of that
power, or enacted with a view to it. On the contrary, they are treated as
quarantine and health laws, are so denominated in the acts of Congress, and
are considered as flowing from the acknowledged power of a State, to provide
for the health of its citizens. But, as it was apparent that some of the
provisions made for this purpose, and in virtue of this power, might interfere
with, and be affected by the laws of the United States, made for the
regulation of commerce, Congress, in that spirit of harmony and concilitation,
which ought always to characterize the conduct of governments standing in the
relation which that of the Union and those of the States bear to each other,
has directed its officers to aid in the execution of these laws; and has, in
some measure, adapted its own legislation to this object, by making provisions
in aid of those of the States. But, in making these provisions, the opinion is
unequivocally manifested, that Congress may control the State laws, so far as
it may be necessary to control them, for the regulation of commerce.

261

The act passed in 1803,93 prohibiting the importation of slaves into any State
which shall itself prohibit their importation, implies, it is said, an
admission that the States possessed the power to exclude or admit them; from
which it is inferred, that they possess the same power with respect to other
articles.

262

If this inference were correct; if this power was exercised, not under any
particular clause in the constitution, but in virtue of a general right over
the subject of commerce, to exist as long as the constitution itself, it might
now be exercised. Any State might now import African slaves into its own
territory. But it is obvious, that the power of the States over this subject,
previous to the year 1808, constitutes an exception to the power of Congress
to regulate commerce, and the exception is expressed in such words, as to
manifest clearly the intention to continue the pre-existing right of the
States to admit or exclude, for a limited period. The words are, 'the
migration or importation of such persons as any of the States, now existing,
_shall_ think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress prior
to the year 1808. The whole object of the exception is, to preserve the power
to those States which might be disposed to exercise it; and its language seems
to the Court to convey this idea unequivocally. The possession of this
particular power, then, during the time limited in the constitution, cannot be
admitted to prove the possession of any other similar power.

263

It has been said, that the act of August 7, 1789, acknowledges a concurrent
power in the States to regulate the conduct of pilots, and hence is inferred
an admission of their concurrent right with Congress to regulate commerce with
foreign nations, and amongst the States. But this inference is not, we think,
justified by the fact.

264

Although Congress cannot enable a State to legislate, Congress may adopt the
provisions of a State on any subject. When the government of the Union was
brought into existence, it found a system for the regulation of its pilots in
full force in every State. The act which has been mentioned, adopts this
system, and gives it the same validity as if its provisions had been specially
made by Congress. But the act, it may be said, is prospective also, and the
adoption of laws to be made in future, presupposes the right in the maker to
legislate on the subject.

265

The act unquestionably manifests an intention to leave this subject entirely
to the States, until Congress should think proper to interpose; but the very
enactment of such a law indicates an opinion that it was necessary; that the
existing system would not be applicable to the new state of things, unless
expressly applied to it by Congress. But this section is confined to pilots
within the 'bays, inlets, rivers, harbours, and ports of the United States,'
which are, of course, in whole or in part, also within the limits of some
particular state. The acknowledged power of a State to regulate its police,
its domestic trade, and to govern its own citizens, may enable it to legislate
on this subject, to a considerable extent; and the adoption of its system by
Congress, and the application of it to the whole subject of commerce, does not
seem to the Court to imply a right in the States so to apply it of their own
authority. But the adoption of the State system being temporary, being only
'until further legislative provision shall be made by Congress,' shows,
conclusively, an opinion that Congress could control the whole subject, and
might adopt the system of the States, or provide one of its own.

266

A State, it is said, or even a private citizen, may construct light houses.
But gentlemen must be aware, that if this proves a power in a State to
regulate commerce, it proves that the same power is in the citizen. States, or
individuals who own lands, may, if not forbidden by law, erect on those lands
what buildings they please; but this power is entirely distinct from that of
regulating commerce, and may, we presume, be restrained, if exercised so as to
produce a public mischief.

267

These acts were cited at the bar for the purpose of showing an opinion in
Congress, that the States possess, concurrently with the Legislature of the
Union, the power to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the
States. Upon reviewing them, we think they do not establish the proposition
they were intended to prove. They show the opinion, that the States retain
powers enabling them to pass the laws to which allusion has been made, not
that those laws proceed from the particular power which has been delegated to
Congress.

268

It has been contended by the counsel for the appellant, that, as the word 'to
regulate' implies in its nature, full power over the thing to be regulated, it
excludes, necessarily, the action of all others that would perform the same
operation on the same thing. That regulation is designed for the entire
result, applying to those parts which remain as they were, as well as to those
which are altered. It produces a uniform whole, which is as much disturbed and
deranged by changing what the regulating power designs to leave untouched, as
that on which it has operated.

269

There is great force in this argument, and the Court is not satisfied that it
has been refuted.

270

Since, however, in exercising the power of regulating their own purely
internal affairs, whether of trading or police, the States may sometimes enact
laws, the validity of which depends on their interfering with, and being
contrary to, an act of Congress passed in pursuance of the constitution, the
Court will enter upon the inquiry, whether the laws of New-York, as expounded
by the highest tribunal of that State, have, in their application to this
case, come into collision with an act of Congress, and deprived a citizen of a
right to which that act entitles him. Should this collision exist, it will be
immaterial whether those laws were passed in virtue of a concurrent power 'to
regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several States,' or, in
virtue of a power to regulate their domestic trade and police. In one case and
the other, the acts of New-York must yield to the law of Congress; and the
decision sustaining the privilege they confer, against a right given by a law
of the Union, must be erroneous.

271

This opinion has been frequently expressed in this Court, and is founded, as
well on the nature of the government as on the words of the constitution. In
argument, however, it has been contended, that if a law passed by a State, in
the exercise of its acknowledged sovereignty, comes into conflict with a law
passed by Congress in pursuance of the constitution, they affect the subject,
and each other, like equal opposing powers.

272

But the framers of our constitution foresaw this state of things, and provided
for it, by declaring the supremacy not only of itself, but of the laws made in
pursuance of it. The nullity of any act, law. The appropriate inconsistent
with the constitution, is produced by the declaration, that the constitution
is the supreme preme law. The appropriate application of that part of the
clause which confers the same supremacy on laws and treaties, is to such acts
of the State Legislatures as do not transcend their powers, but, though
enacted in the execution of acknowledged State powers, interfere with, or are
contrary to the laws of Congress, made in pursuance of the constitution, or
some treaty made under the authority of the United States. In every such case,
the act of Congress, or the treaty, is supreme; and the law of the State,
though enacted in the exercise of powers not controverted, must yield to it.

273

In pursuing this inquiry at the bar, it has been said, that the constitution
does not confer the right of intercourse between State and State. That right
derives its source from those laws whose authority is acknowledged by
civilized man throughout the world. This is true. The constitution found it an
existing right, and agve to Congress the power to regulate it. In the exercise
of this power, Congress has passed 'an act for enrolling or licensing ships or
vessels to be employed in the coasting trade and fisheries, and for regulating
the same.' The counsel for the respondent contend, that this act does not give
the right to sail from port to port, but confines itself to regulating a pre-
existing right, so far only as to confer certain privileges on enrolled and
licensed vessels in its exercise.

274

It will at once occur, that, when a Legislature attaches certain privileges
and exemptions to the exercise of a right over which its control is absolute,
the law must imply a power to exercise the right. The privileges are gone, if
the right itself be annihilated. It would be contrary to all reason, and to
the course of human affairs, to say that a State is unable to strip a vessel
of the particular privileges attendant on the exercise of a right, and yet may
annul the right itself; that the State of New-York cannot prevent an enrolled
and licensed vessel, proceeding from Elizabethtown, in New-Jersey, to New-
York, from enjoying, in her course, and on her entrance into port, all the
privileges conferred by the act of Congress; but can shut her up in her own
port, and prohibit altogether her entering the waters and ports of another
State. To the Court it seems very clear, that the whole act on the subject of
the coasting trade, according to those principles which govern the
construction of statutes, implies, unequivocally, an authority to licensed
vessels to carry on the coasting trade.

275

But we will proceed briefly to notice those sections which bear more directly
on the subject.

276

The first section declares, that vessels enrolled by virtue of a previous law,
and certain other vessels, enrolled as described in that act, and having
alicense in force, as is by the act required, 'and no others, shall be deemed
ships or vessels of the United States, entitled to the privileges of ships or
vessels employed in the coasting trade.'

277

This section seems to the Court to contain a positive enactment, the the
vessels it describes shall be entitled to the privileges of ships or vessels
employed in the coasting trade. Thes e privileges cannot be separated from the
trade, and cannot be enjoyed, unless the trade may be prosecuted. The grant of
the privilege is an idle, empty form, conveying nothing, unless it convey the
right to which the privilege is attached, and in the exercise of which its
whole value consists. To construe these words otherwise than as entitling the
ships or vessels described, to carry on the coasting trade, would be, we
think, to disregard the apparent intent of the act.

278

The fourth section directs the proper officer to grant to a vessel qualified
to receive it, 'a license for carrying on the coasting trade;' and prescribes
its form. After reciting the compliance of the applicant with the previous
requisites of the law, the operative words of the instrument are, 'license is
hereby granted for the said steam-boat, Bellona, to be employed in carrying on
the coasting trade for one year from the date hereof, and no longer.'

279

These are not the words of the officer; they are the words of the legislature;
and convey as explicitly the authority the act intended to give, and operate
as effectually, as if they had been inserted in any other part of the act,
than in the license itself.

280

The word 'license,' means permission, or authority; and a license to do any
particular thing, is a permission or authority to do that thing; and if
granted by a person having power to grant it, transfers to the grantee the
right to do whatever it purports to authorize. It certainly transfers to him
all the right which the grantor can transfer, to do what is within the terms
of the license.

281

Would the validity or effect of such an instrument be questioned by the
respondent, if executed by persons claiming regularly under the laws of New-
York?

282

The license must be understood to be what it purports to be, a legislative
authority to the steamboat Bellona, 'to be employed in carrying on the
coasting trade, for one year from this date.'

283

It has been denied that these words authorize a voyage from New-Jersey to New-
York. It is true, that no ports are specified; but it is equally true, that
the words used are perfectly intelligible, and do confer such authority as
unquestionably, as if the ports had been mentioned. The coasting trade is a
term well understood. The law has defined it; and all know its meaning
perfectly. The act describes, with great minuteness, the various operations of
a vessel engaged in it; and it cannot, we think, be doubted, that a voyage
from New-Jersey to New-York, is one of those operations.

284

Notwithstanding the decided language of the license, it has also been
maintained, that it gives no right to trade; and that its sole purpose is to
confer the American character.

285

The answer given to this argument, that the American character is conferred by
the enrolment, and not by the license, is, we think, founded too clearly in
the words of the law, to require the support of any additional observations.
The enrolment of vessels designed for the coasting trade, corresponds
precisely with the registration of vessels designed for the foreign trade, and
requires every circumstance which can constitute the American character. The
license can be granted only to vessels already enrolled, if they be of the
burthen of twenty tons and upwards; and requires no circumstance essential to
the American character. The object of the license, then, Cannot be to
ascertain the character of the vessel, but to do what it professes to do--that
is, to give permission to a vessel already proved by her enrolment to be
American, to carry on the coasting trade.

286

But, if the license be a permit to carry on the coasting trade, the respondent
denies that these boats were engaged in that trade, or that the decree under
consideration has restrained them from prosecuting it. The boats of the
appellant were, we are told, employed in the transportation of passengers; and
this is no part of that commerce which Congress may regulate.

287

If, as our whole course of legislation on this subject shows, the power of
Congress has been universally understood in America, to comprehend navigation,
it is a very persuasive, if not a conclusive argument, to prove that the
construction is correct; and, if it be correct, no clear distinction is
perceived between the power to regulate vessels employed in transporting men
for hire, and property for hire. The subject is transferred to Congress, and
no exception to the grant can be admitted, which is not proved by the words or
the nature of the thing. A coasting vessel employed in the transportation of
passengers, is as much a portion of the American marine, as one employed in
the transportation of a cargo; and no reason is perceived why such vessel
should be withdrawn from the regulating power of that government, which has
been thought best fitted for the purpose generally. The provisions of the law
respecting native seamen, and respecting ownership, are as applicable to
vessels carrying men, as to vessels carrying manufactures; and no reason is
perceived why the power over the subject should not be placed in the same
hands. The argument urged at the bar, rests on the foundation, that the power
of Congress does not extend to navigation, as a branch of commerce, and can
only be applied to that subject incidentally and occasionally. But if that
foundation be removed, we must show some plain, intelligible distinction,
supported by the constitution, or by reason, for discriminating between the
power of Congress over vessels employed in navigating the same seas. We can
perceive no such distinetion.

288

If we refer to the constitution, the inference to be drawn from it is rather
against the distinction. The section which restrains Congress from prohibiting
the migration or importation of such persons as any of the States may think
proper to admit, until the year 1808, has always been considered as an
exception from the power to regulate commerce, and certainly seems to class
migration with importation. Migration applies as appropriately to voluntary,
as importation does to involuntary, arrivals; and, so far as an exception from
a power proves its existence, this section proves that the power to regulate
commerce applies equally to the regulation of vessels employed in transporting
men, who pass from place to place voluntarily, and to those who pass
involuntarily.

289

If the power reside in Congress, as a portion of the general grant to regulate
commerce, then acts applying that power to vessels generally, must be
construed as comprehending all vessels. If none appear to be excluded by the
language of the act, none can be excluded by construction. Vessels have always
been employed to a greater or less extent in the transporation of passengers,
and have never been supposed to be, on that account, withdrawn from the
control or protection of Congress. Packets which ply along the coast, as well
as those which make voyages between Europe and America, consider the
transportation of passengers as an important part of their business. Yet it
has never been suspected that the general laws of navigation did not apply to
them.

290

The duty act, sections 23 and 46, contains provisions respecting passengers,
and shows, that vessels which transport them, have the same rights, and must
perform the same duties, with other vessels. They are governed by the general
laws of navigation.

291

In the progress of things, this seems to have grown into a particular
employment, and to have attracted the particular attention of government.
Congress was no longer satisfied with comprehending vessels engaged specially
in this business, within those provisions which were intended for vessels
generally; and, on the 2d of March, 1819, passed 'an act regulating passenger
ships and vessels.' This wise and humane law provides for the safety and
comfort of passengers, and for the communication of every thing concerning
them which may interest the government, to the Department of State, but makes
no provision concerning the entry of the vessel, or her conduct in the waters
of the United States. This, we think, shows conclusively the sense of
Congress, (if, indeed, any evidence to that point could be required,) that the
pre-existing regulations comprehended passenger ships among others; and, in
prescribing the same duties, the Legislature must have considered them as
possessing the same rights.

292

If, then, it were even true, that the Bellona and the Stoudinger were employed
exclusively in the conveyance of passengers between New-York and New-Jersey,
it would not follow that this occupation did not constitute a part of the
coasting trade of the United States, and was not protected by the license
annexed to the answer. But we cannot perceive how the occupation of these
vessels can be drawn into question, in the case before the Court. The laws of
New-York, which grant the exclusive privilege set up by the respondent, take
no notice of the employment of vessels, and relate only to the principle by
which they are propelled. Those laws do not inquire whether vessels are
engaged in transporting men or merchandise, but whether they are moved by
steam or wind. If by the former, the waters of New-York are closed against
them, though their cargoes be dutiable goods, which the laws of the United
States permit them to enter and deliver in New-York. If by the latter, those
waters are free to them, though they should carry passengers only. In
conformity with the law, is the bill of the plaintiff in the State Court. The
bill does not complain that the Bellona and the Stoudinger carry passengers,
but that they are moved by steam. This is the injury of which he complains,
and is the sole injury against the continuance of which he asks relief. The
bill does not even allege, specially, that those vessels were employed in the
transportation of passengers, but says, generally, that they were employed 'in
the transportation of passengers, or otherwise.' The answer avers, only, that
they were employed in the coasting trade, and insists on the right to carry on
any trade authorized by the license. No testimony is taken, and the writ of
injunction and decree restrain these licensed vessels, not from carrying
passengers, but from being moved through the waters of New-York by steam, for
any purpose whatever.

293

The questions, then, whether the conveyance of passengers be a part of the
coasting trade, and whether a vessel can be protected in that occupation by a
coasting license, are not, and cannot be, raised in this case. The real and
sole question seems to be, whether a steam machine, in actual use, deprives a
vessel of the privileges conferred by a license.

294

In considering this question, the first idea which presents itself, is, that
the laws of Congress for the regulation of commerce, do not look to the
principle by which vessels are moved. That subject is left entirely to
individual discretion; and, in that vast and complex system of legislative
enactment concerning it, which embraces every thing that the Legislature
thought it necessary to notice, there is not, we believe, one word respecting
the peculiar principle by which vessels are propelled through the water,
except what may be found in a single act, granting a particular privilege to
steam boats. With this exception, every act, either prescribing duties, or
granting privileges, applies to every vessel, whether nayigated by the
instrumentality of wind or fire, of sails or machinery. The whole weight of
proof, then, is thrown upon him who would introduce a distinction to which the
words of the law give no countenance.

295

If a real difference could be admitted to exist between vessels carrying
passengers and others, it has already been observed, that there is no fact in
this case which can bring up that question. And, if the occupation of steam
boats be a matter of such general notoriety, that the Court may be presumed to
know it, although not specially informed by the record, then we deny that the
transportation of passengers is their exclusive occupation. It is a matter of
general history, that, in our western waters, their principal employment is
the transportation of merchandise; and all know, that in the waters of the
Atlantic they are frequently so employed.

296

But all inquiry into this subject seems to the Court to be put completely at
rest, by the act already mentioned, entitled, 'An act for the enrolling and
licensing of steam boats.'

297

This act authorizes a steam boat employed, or intended to be employed, only in
a river or bay of the United States, owned wholly or in part by an alien,
resident within the United States, to be enrolled and licensed as if the same
belonged to a citizen of the United States.

298

This act demonstrates the opinion of Congress, that steam boats may be
enrolled and licensed, in common with vessels using sails. They are, of
course, entitled to the same privileges, and can no more be restrained from
navigating waters, and entering ports which are free to such vessels, than if
they were wafted on their voyage by the winds, instead of being propelled by
the agency of fire. The one element may be as legitimately used as the other,
for every commercial purpose authorized by the laws of the Union; and the act
of a State inhibiting the use of either to any vessel having a license under
the act of Congress, comes, we think, in direct collision with that act.

299

As this decides the cause, it is unnecessary to enter in an examination of
that part of the constitution which empowers Congress to promote the progress
of science and the useful arts.

300

The Court is aware that, in stating the train of reasoning by which we have
been conducted to this result, much time has been consumed in the attempt to
demonstrate propositions which may have been thought axioms. It is felt that
the tediousness inseparable from the endeavour to prove that which is already
clear, is imputable to a considerable part of this opinion. But it was
unavoidable. The conclusion to which we have come, depends on a chain of
principles which it was necessary to preserve unbroken; and, although some of
them were thought nearly selfevident, the magnitude of the question, the
weight of character belonging to those from whose judgment we dissent, and the
argument at the bar, demanded that we should assume nothing.

301

Powerful and ingenious minds, taking, as postulates, that the powers expressly
granted to the government of the Union, are to be contracted by construction,
into the narrowest possible compass, and that the original powers of the
States are retained, if any possible construction will retain them, may, by a
course of well digested, but refined and metaphysical reasoning, founded on
these premises, explain away the constitution of our country, and leave it, a
magnificent structure, indeed, to look at, but totally unfit for use. They may
so entangle and perplex the understanding, as to obscure principles, which
were before thought quite plain, and induce doubts where, if the mind were to
pursue its own course, none would be perceived. In such a case, it is
peculiarly necessary to recur to safe and fundamental principles to sustain
those principles, and when sustained, to make them the tests of the arguments
to be examined.

302

Mr. Justice JOHNSON.

303

The judgment entered by the Court in this cause, has my entire approbation;
but having adopted my conclusions on views of the subject materially different
from those of my brethren, I feel it incumbent on me to exhibit those views. I
have, also, another inducement: in questions of great importance and great
delicacy, I feel my duty to the public best discharged, by an effort to
maintain my opinions in my own way.

304

In attempts to construe the constitution, I have never found much benefit
resulting from the inquiry, whether the whole, or any part of it, is to be
construed strictly, or literally. The simple, classical, precise, yet
comprehensive language, in which it is couched, leaves, at most, but very
little latitude for construction; and when its intent and meaning is
discovered, nothing remains but to execute the will of those who made it, in
the best manner to effect the purposes intended. The great and paramount
purpose, was to unite this mass of wealth and power, for the protection of the
humblest individual; his rights, civil and political, his interests and
prosperity, are the sole _end;_ the rest are nothing but the _means_. But the
principal of those means, one so essential as to approach nearer the
characteristics of an end, was the independence and harmony of the States,
that they may the better subserve the purposes of cherishing and protecting
the respective families of this great republic.

305

The strong sympathies, rather than the feeble government, which bound the
States together during a common war, dissolved on the return of peace; and the
very principles which gave rise to the war of the revolution, began to
threaten the confederacy with anarchy and ruin. The States had resisted a tax
imposed by the parent State, and now reluctantly submitted to, or altogether
rejected, the moderate demands of the confederation. Every one recollects the
painful and threatening discussions, which arose on the subject of the five
per cent. duty. Some States rejected it altogether; others insisted on
collecting it themselves; scarcely any acquiesced without reservations, which
deprived it altogether of the character of a national measure; and at length,
some repealed the laws by which they had signified their acquiescence.

306

For a century the States had submitted, with murmurs, to the commercial
restrictions imposed by the parent State; and now, finding themselves in the
unlimited possession of those powers over their own commerce, which they had
so long been deprived of, and so earnestly coveted, that selfish principle
which, well controlled, is so salutary, and which, unrestricted, is so unjust
and tyrannical, guided by inexperience and jealousy, began to show itself in
iniquitous laws and impolitic measures, from which grew up a conflict of
commercial regulations, destructive to the harmony of the States, and fatal to
their commercial interests abroad.

307

This was the immediate cause, that led to the forming of a convention.

308

As early as 1778, the subject had been pressed upon the attention of Congress,
by a memorial from the State of New-Jersey; and in 1781, we find a resolution
presented to that body, by one of the most enlightened men of his day,94
affirming, that 'it is indispensably necessary, that the United States, in
Congress assembled, should bevested with a right of superintending the
commercial regulations of every State, that none may take place that shall be
partial or contrary to the common interests.' The resolution of Virginia,95
appointing her commissioners, to meet commissioners from other States,
expresses their purpose to be, 'to take into consideration the trade of the
United States, to consider how far an uniform system in their commercial
regulations, may be necessary to their common interests and their permanent
harmony.' And Mr. Madison's resolution, which led to that measure, is
introduced by a preamble entirely explicit to this point: 'Whereas, the
relative situation of the United States has been found, on trial, to require
uniformity in their commercial regulations, as the only effectual policy for
obtaining, in the ports of foreign nations, a stipulation of privileges
reciprocal to those enjoyed by the subjects of such nations in the ports of
the United States, for preventing animosities, which cannot fail to arise
among the several States, from the interference of partial and separate
regulations,' &c. 'therefore, resolved,' &c.

309

The history of the times will, therefore, sustain the opinion, that the grant
of power over commerce, if intended to be commensurate with the evils
existing, and the purpose of remedying those evils, could be only commensurate
with the power of the States over the subject. And this opinion is supported
by a very remarkable evidence of the general understanding of the whole
American people, when the grant was made.

310

There was not a State in the Union, in which there did not, at that time,
exist a variety of commercial regulations; concerning which it is too much to
suppose, that the whole ground covered by those regulations was immediately
assumed by actual legislation, under the authority of the Union. But where was
the existing statute on this subject, that a State attempted to execute? or by
what State was it ever thought necessary to repeal those statutes? By common
consent, those laws dropped lifeless from their statute books, for want of the
sustaining power, that had been relinquished to Congress.

311

And the plain and direct import of the words of the grant, is consistent with
this general understanding.

312

The words of the constitution are, 'Congress shall have power to regulate
commerce with foreign nations, and among the several States, and with the
Indian tribes.'

313

It is not material, in my view of the subject, to inquire whether the article
_a_ or _the_ should be prefixed to the word 'power.' Either, or neither, will
produce the same result: if either, it is clear that the article _the_ would
be the proper one, since the next preceding grant of power is certainly
exclusive, to wit: 'to borrow money on the credit of the United States.' But
mere verbal criticism I reject.

314

My opinion is founded on the application of the words of the grant to the
subject of it.

315

The 'power to regulate commerce,' here meant to be granted, was that power to
regulate commerce which previously existed in the States. But what was that
power? The States were, unquestionably, supreme; and each possessed that power
over commerce, which is acknowledged to reside in every sovereign State. The
definition and limits of that power are to be sought among the features of
international law; and, as it was not only admitted, but insisted on by both
parties, in argument, that, ' _unaffected by a state of war, by treaties, or
by municipal regulations, all commerce among independent States was
legitimate_ ,' there is no necessity to appeal to the oracles of the _jus
commune_ for the correctness of that doctrine. The law of nations, regarding
man as a social animal, pronounces all commerce legitimate in a state of
peace, until prohibited by positive law. The power of a sovereign state over
commerce, therefore, amounts to nothing more than a power to limit and
restrain it at pleasure. And since the power to prescribe the limits to its
freedom, necessarily implies the power to determine what shall remain
unrestrained, it follows, that the power must be exclusive; it can reside but
in one potentate; and hence, the grant of this power carries with it the whole
subject, leaving nothing for the State to act upon.

316

And such has been the practical construction of the act. Were every law on the
subject of commerce repealed to-morrow, all commerce would be lawful; and, in
practice, merchants never inquire what is permitted, but what is forbidden
commerce. Of all the endless variety of branches of foreign commerce, now
carried on to every quarter of the world, I know of no one that is permitted
by act of Congress, any otherwise than by not being forbidden. No statute of
the United States, that I know of, was ever passed to permit a commerce,
unless in consequence of its having been prohibited by some previous statute.

317

I speak not here of the treaty making power, for that is not exercised under
the grant now under consideration. I confine my observation to _laws_ properly
so called. And even where freedom of commercial intercourse is made a subject
of stipulation in a treaty, it is generally with a view to the removal of some
previous restriction; or the introduction of some new privilege, most
frequently, is identified with the return to a state of peace. But another
view of the subject leads directly to the same conclusion. Power to regulate
_foreign commerce_ , is given in the same words, and in the same breath, as it
were, with that over the commerce of the States and with the Indian tribes.
But the power to regulate _foreign_ commerce is necessarily exclusive. The
States are unknown to foreign nations; their sovereignty exists only with
relation to each other and the general government. Whatever regulations
foreign commerce should be subjected to in the ports of the Union, the general
government would be held responsible for them; and all other regulations, but
those which Congress had imposed, would be regarded by foreign nations as
trespasses and violations of national faith and comity.

318

But the language which grants the power as to one description of commerce,
grants it as to all; and, in fact, if ever the exercise of a right, or
acquiescence in a construction, could be inferred from contemporaneous and
continued assent, it is that of the exclusive effect of this grant.

319

A right over the subject has never been pretended to in any instance, except
as incidental to the exercise of some other unquestionable power.

320

The present is an instance of the assertion of that kind, as incidental to a
municipal power; that of superintending the internal concerns of a State, and
particularly of extending protection and patronage, in the shape of a
monopoly, to genius and enterprise.

321

The grant to Livingston and Fulton, interferes with the freedom of intercourse
and on this principle its constitutionality is contested.

322

When speaking of the power of Congress over navigation, I do not regard it as
a power incidental to that of regulating commerce; I consider it as the thing
itself; inseparable from it as vital motion is from vital existence.

323

Commerce, in its simplest signification, means an exchange of goods; but in
the advancement of society, labour, transportation, intelligence, care, and
various mediums of exchange, become commodities, and enter into commerce; the
subject, the vehicle, the agent, and their various operations, become the
objects of commercial regulation. Ship building, the carrying trade, and
propagation of seamen, are such vital agents of commercial prosperity, that
the nation which could not legislate over these subjects, would not possess
power to regulate commerce.

324

That such was the understanding of the framers of the constitution, is
conspicuous from provisions contained in that instrument.

325

The first clause of the 9th section, not only considers the right of
controlling personal ingress or migration, as implied in the powers previously
vested in Congress over commerce, but acknowledges it as a legitimate subject
of revenue. And, although the leading object of this section undoubtedly was
the importation of slaves, yet the words are obviously calculated to comprise
persons of all descriptions, and to recognise in Congress a power to prohibit,
where the States permit, although they cannot permit when the States prohibit.
The treaty making power undoubtedly goes further. So the fifth clause of the
same section furnishes an exposition of the sense of the Convention as to the
power of Congress over navigation: 'nor shall vessels bound to or from one
State, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another.'

326

But, it is almost labouring to prove a self-evident proposition, since the
sense of mankind, the practice of the world, the contemporaneous assumption,
and continued exercise of the power, and universal acquiescence, have so
clearly established the right of Congress over navigation, and the
transportation of both men and their goods, as not only incidental to, but
actually of the essence of, the power to regulate commerce. As to the
transportation of passengers, and passengers in a steam boat, I consider it as
having been solemnly recognised by the State of New-York, as a subject both of
commercial regulation and of revenue. She has imposed a transit duty upon
steam boat passengers arriving at Albany, and unless this be done in the
exercise of her control over personal intercourse, as incident to internal
commerce, I know not on what principle the individual has been subjected to
this tax. The subsequent imposition upon the steam boat itself, appears to be
but a commutation, and operates as an indirect instead of a direct tax upon
the same subject. The passenger pays it at last.

327

It is impossible, with the views which I entertain of the principle on which
the commercial privileges of the people of of United States, among themselves,
rests, to concur in the view which this Court takes of the effect of the
coasting license in this cause. I do not regard it as the foundation of the
right set up in behalf of the appellant. If there was any one object riding
over every other in the adoption of the constitution, it was to keep the
commercial intercourse among the States free from all invidious and partial
restraints. And I cannot overcome the conviction, that if the licensing act
was repealed to-morrow, the rights of the appellant to a reversal of the
decision complained of, would be as strong as it is under this license. One
half the doubts in life arise from the defects of language, and if this
instrument had been called an _exemption_ instead of a license, it would have
given a better idea of its character. Licensing acts, in fact, in legislation,
are universally restraining acts; as, for example, acts licensing gaming
houses, retailers of spiritous liquors, &c. The act, in this instance, is
distinctly of that character, and forms part of an extensive system, the
object of which is to encourage American shipping, and place them on an equal
footing with the shipping of other nations. Almost every commercial nation
reserves to its own subjects a monopoly of its coasting trade; and a
countervailing privilege in favour of American shipping is contemplated, in
the whole legislation of the United States on this subject. It is not to give
the vessel an American character, that the license is granted; that effect has
been correctly attributed to the act of her enrolment. But it is to confer on
her American privileges, as contradistinguished from foreign; and to preserve
the government from fraud by foreigners, in surreptitiously intruding
themselves into the American commercial marine, as well as frauds upon the
revenue in the trade coastwise, that this whole system is projected. Many
duties and formalities are necessarily imposed upon the American foreign
commerce, which would be burdensome in the active coasting trade of the
States, and can be dispensed with. A higher rate of tonnage also is imposed,
and this license entitles the vessels that take it, to those exemptions, but
to nothing more. A common register, equally entitles vessels to carry on the
coasting trade, although it does not exempt them from the forms of foreign
commerce, or from compliance with the 16th and 17th sections of the enrolling
act. And even a foreign vessel may be employed coastwise, upon complying with
the requisitions of the 24th section. I consider the license, therefore, as
nothing more than what it purports to be, according to the 1st section of this
act, conferring on the licensed vessel certain privileges in that trade, not
conferred on other vessels; but the abstract right of commercial intercourse,
stripped of those privileges, is common to all.

328

Yet there is one view, in which the license may be allowed considerable
influence in sustaining the decision of this Court.

329

It has been contended, that the grants of power to the United States over any
subject, do not, necessarily, paralyze the arm of the States, or deprive them
of the capacity to act on the same subject. The this can be the effect only of
prohibitory provisions in their own constitutions, or in that of the general
government. The _vis vitae_ of power is still existing in the States, if not
extinguished by the constitution of the United States. That, although as to
all those grants of power which may be called aboriginal, with relation to the
government, brought into existence by the constitution, they, of course, are
out of the reach of State power; yet, as to all concessions of powers which
previously existed in the States, it was otherwise. The practice of our
government certainly has been, on many subjects, to occupy so much only of the
field opened to them, as they think the public interests require. Witness the
jurisdiction of the Circuit Courts, limited both as to cases and as to amount;
and various other instances that might to cited. But the license furnishes a
full answer to this objection; for, although one grant of power over commerce,
should not be deemed a total relinquishment of power over the subject, but
amounting only to a power to assume, still the power of the States must be at
an end, so far as the United States have, by their legislative act, taken the
subject under their immediate superintendence. So far as relates to the
commerce coastwise, the act under which this license is granted, contains a
full expression of Congress on this subject. Vessels, from five tons upwards,
carrying on the coasting trade, are made the subject of regulation by that
act. And this license proves, that this vessel has complied with that act, and
been regularly ingrafted into one class of the commercial marine of the
country.

330

It remains, to consider the objections to this opinion, as presented by the
counsel for the appellee. On those which had relation to the particular
character of this boat, whether as a steam boat or a ferry boat, I have only
to remark, that in both those characters, she is expressly recognised as an
object of the provisions which relate to licenses.

331

The 12th section of the act of 1793, has these words: 'That when the master of
any ship or vessel, _ferry boats_ excepted, shall be changed,' &c. And the act
which exempts licensed steam boats from the provisions against alien
interests, shows such boats to be both objects of the licensing act, and
objects of that act, when employed exclusively within our bays and rivers.

332

But the principal objections to these opinions arise, 1st. From the
unavoidable action of some of the municipal powers of the States, upon
commercial subjects.

333

2d. From passages in the constitution, which are supposed to imply a
_concurrent_ power in the States in regulating commerce.

334

It is no objection to the existence of distinct, substantive powers, that, in
their application, they bear upon the same subject. The same bale of goods,
the same cask of provisions, or the same ship, that may be the subject of
commercial regulation, may also be the vehicle of disease. And the health laws
that require them to be stopped and ventilated, are no more intended as
regulations on commerce, than the laws which permit their importation, are
intended to innoculate the community with disease. Their different purposes
mark the distinction between the powers brought into action; and while frankly
exercised, they can produce no serious collision. As to laws affecting
ferries, turnpike roads, and other subjects of the same class, so far from
meriting the epithet of commercial regulations, they are, in fact, commercial
facilities, for which, by the consent of mankind, a compensation is paid, upon
the same principle that the whole commercial world submit to pay light money
to the Danes. Inspection laws are of a more equivocal nature, and it is
obvious, that the constitution has viewed that subject with much solicitude.
But so far from sustaining an inference in favour of the power of the States
over commerce, I cannot but think that the guarded provisions of the 10th
section, on this subject, furnish a strong argument against that inference. It
was obvious, that inspection laws must combine municipal with commercial
regulations; and, while the power over the subject is yielded to the States,
for obvious reasons, an absolute control is given over State legislation on
the subject, as far as that legislation may be exercised, so as to affect the
commerce of the country. The inferences, to be correctly drawn, from this
whole article, appear to me to be altogether in favour of the exclusive grants
to Congress of power over commerce, and the reverse of that which the appellee
contends for.

335

This section contains the positive restrictions imposed by the constitution
upon State power. The first clause of it, specifies those powers which the
States are precluded from exercising, even though the Congress were to permit
them. The second, those which the States may exercise with the consent of
Congress. And here the sedulous attention to the subject of State exclusion
from commercial power, is strongly marked. Not satisfied with the express
grant to the United States of the power over commerce, this clause negatives
the exercise of that power to the States, as to the only two objects which
could ever tempt them to assume the exercise of that power, to wit, the
collection of a revenue from imposts and duties on imports and exports; or
from a tonnage duty. As to imposts on imports or exports, such a revenue might
have been aimed at _directly_ , by express legislation, or _indirectly_ , in
the form of inspection laws; and it became necessary to guard against both.
Hence, first, the consent of Congress to such imposts or duties, is made
necessary; and as to inspection laws, it is limited to the minimum of
expenses. Then, the money so raised shall be paid into the treasury of the
United States, or may be sued for. since it is declared to be for their use.
And lastly, all such laws may be modified, or repealed, by an act of Congress.
It is impossible for a right to be more guarded. As to a tonnage duty, that
could be recovered in but one way; and a sum so raised, being obviously
necessary for the execution of health laws, and other unavoidable port
expenses, it was intended that it should go into the State treasuries; and
nothing more was required, therefore, than the consent of Congress. But this
whole clause, as to these two subjects, appears to have been introduced _ex
abundanti cautela_ , to remove every temptation to an attempt to-interfere
with the powers of Congress over commerce, and to show how far Congress might
consent to permit the States to exercise that power. Beyond those limits, even
by the consent of Congress, they could not exercise it. And thus, we have the
whole effect of the clause. The inference which counsel would deduce from it,
is neither necessary nor consistent with the general purpose of the clause.

336

But instances have been insisted on, with much confidence, in argument, in
which, by municipal laws, particular regulations respecting their cargoes have
been imposed upon shipping in the ports of the United States; and one, in
which forfeiture was made the penalty of disobedience.

337

Until such laws have been tested by exceptions to their constitutionality, the
argument certainly wants much of the force attributed to it; but admitting
their constitutionality, they present only the familiar case of punishment
inflicted by both governments upon the same individual. He who robs the mail,
may also steal the horse that carries it, and would, unquestionably, be
subject to punishment, at the same time, under the laws of the State in which
the crime is committed, and under those of the United States. And these
punishments may interfere, and one render it impossible to inflict the other,
and yet the two governments would be acting under powers that have no claim to
identity.

338

It would be in vain to deny the possibility of a clashing and collision
between the measures of the two governments. The line cannot be drawn with
sufficient distinctness between the municipal powers of the one, and the
commercial powers of the other. In some points they meet and blend so as
scarcely to admit of separation. Hitherto the only remedy has been applied
which the case admits of; that of a frank and candid co-operation for the
general good. Witness the laws of Congress requiring its officers to respect
the inspection laws of the States, and to aid in enforcing their health laws;
that which surrenders to the States the superintendence of pilotage, and the
many laws passed to permit a tonnage duty to be levied for the use of their
ports. Other instances could be cited, abundantly to prove that collision must
be sought to be produced; and when it does arise, the question must be decided
how far the powers of Congress are adequate to put it down. Wherever the
powers of the respective governments are frankly exercised, with a distinct
view to the ends of such powers, they may act upon the same object, or use the
same means, and yet the powers be kept perfectly distinct. A resort to the
same means, therefore, is no argument to prove the identity of their
respective powers.

339

I have not touched upon the right of the States to grant patents for
inventions or improvements, generally, because it does not necessarily arise
in this cause. It is enough for all the purposes of this decision, if they
cannot exercise it so as to restrain a free intercourse among the States.

340

DECREE. This cause came on to be heard on the transcript of the record of the
Court for the Trial of Impeachments and Correction of Errors of the State of
New-York, and was argued by counsel. On consideration whereof, this Court is
of opinion, that the several licenses to the steam boats the Stoudinger and
the Bellona, to carry on the coasting trade, which are set up by the
appellant, Thomas Gibbons, in his answer to the bill of the respondent, Aaron
Ogden, filed in the Court of Chancery for the State of New-York, which were
granted under an act of Congress, passed in pursuance of the constitution of
the United States, gave full authority to those vessels to navigate the waters
of the United States, by steam or otherwise, for the purpose of carrying on
the coasting trade, any law of the State of New-York to the contrary
notwithstanding; and that so much of the several laws of the State of New-
York, as prohibits vessels, licensed according to the laws of the United
States, from navigating the waters of the State of New-York, by means of fire
or steam, is repugnant to the said constitution, and void. This Court is,
therefore, of opinion, that the decree of the Court of New-York for the Trial
of Impeachments and the Correction of Errors, affirming the decree of the
Chancellor of that State, which perpetually enjoins the said Thomas Gibbons,
the appellant, from navigating the waters of the State of New-York with the
steam boats the Stoudinger and the Bellona, by steam or fire, is erroneous,
and ought to be reversed, and the same is hereby reversed and annulled: and
this Court doth further DIRECT, ORDER, and DECREE, that the bill of the said
Aaron Ogden be dismissed, and the same is hereby dismissed accordingly.

1

1 _Laws U. S. p._ 28.

2

_Id._ 50.

3

1 _Bl. Com._ 273\. 4 _Bl. Com._ 160.

4

M'Culloch v. Maryland, 4 _Wheat. Rep._ 405\. Per Marshall, C.J. Houston v.
Moore, 5 _Wheat. Rep._ 48\. Per Story, J.

5

_The Federalist_ , No. 82. Houston v. Moore, 5 _Wheat. Rep._ 48\. Per Story,
J.

6

Sturges v. Crowninshield, 4 _Wheat. Rep._ 193\. Per Marshall, C. J. Houston v.
Moore, 5 _Wheat. Rep._ 15\. 17. Per Washington, J. _Id._ 45\. Per Johnson, J.
_Id._ 48\. Per Story, J.

7

Chirac v. Chirac, 2 _Wheat. Rep._ 268, 269.

8

Sturges v. Crowninshield, 4 _Wheat. Rep._ 193.

9

_The Federalist_ , No. 32.

10

_Id._ No. 82.

11

_Id._ No. 32.

12

_Id._ No. 32.

13

M'Culloch v. Maryland, 4 _Wheat. Rep._ 425\. Per Marshall, C.J. Huston v.
Moore, 5 _Wheat. Rep._ 49\. Per Story, J.

14

1 _R. L._ c. 30. s. 36.

15

Sturges v. Crowninshield, 4 _Wheat. Rep._ 195, 196. Per Marshall, C. J.
Houston v. Moore, 5 _Wheat. Rep._ 34\. 45. Per Johnson, J. _Id._ 49, 50. 55.
Per Story, J. Livingston v. Van Ingen, 9 _Johns. Rep._ 575, 576. Per Thompson,
J.

16

1 _R. L._ p. 406. _s._ 5\. 6.

17

4 _L. U. S._ 67.

18

1 _R. L._ 404.

19

4 _L. U. S._ 91\. 6 _Id._ 47.

20

Houston v. Moore, 5 _Wheat. Rep._ 69\. Per Story, J.

21

_Id._ 51.

22

1 _R. L. of N. Y._ 216\. _Laws of Georgia_ , 468. 6 _Laws of Pennsylvania_ ,
320.

23

_The Federalist_ , No. 43.

24

4 _Burr._ 2408.

25

3 _Wheat. Rep. App._ p. 15.

26

_The Federalist_ , No. 32.

1

These laws will be found specifically enumerated and stated in a note to Mr.
Emmett's argument.

2

_The Federalist_ , No. 12.

3

_Vattel, Droit des Gens, liv._ 1, c. 8. 1. 2. c. 2.

4

_Vattel_ , 1. 2. c. 8. s. 180.

5

_Ingersoll's Dig._ 586.

6

_Id._ 583.

7

_Ingersoll's Dig._ 506\. 612. 617.

8

Livingston v. Van Ingen, 9 _Johns. Rep._ 507.

9

6 _Johns. Rep._ 559, 560. Per Yates, J. 563. Per Thompson, J. 573, 574. Per
Kent, Ch. J.

10

Houston v. Moore, 5 _Wheat. Rep._ 1\. Per Johnson, J. p. 33.

11

_p._ 75.

12

_p._ 222.

13

_p._ 323, 324.

14

_Virginia Debates_ , 300.

15

_Virginia Debates_ , 313.

16

Nos. 32. 82.

17

4 _Wheat. Rep._ 124.

18

_Id._ 193.

19

5 _Wheat. Rep._ 48\. 54.

20

Livingston v. Van Ingen, 9 _Johns. Rep._ 565, 571.

21

_Tucker's Bl. Comm._ Part 1. App. D. p. 154.

22

United States v. Fisher, 2 _Cranch_ , 358. M'Culloch v. Maryland, 4 _Wheat.
Rep._ 316.

23

United States v. Bevans, 3 _Wheat. Rep._ 336.

24

4 _Inst._ 137, 138, 139, 140. 12 Co. 129. _Moor_ , 122. 891, 892.

25

De Lorio v. Boit, 2 _Gallis. Ren._ 308.

26

In those States, 1st, as to _ferries and bridges:_ In the laws of _New-York_ ,
(3d vol. _Webster's ed._ p. 321.) an act passed 19th March, 1803, grants to
John Ransom the exclusive right, for ten years, to keep a ferry across Lake
Champlain, from his landing, at Cumberland Head, to Grand Isle, in Vermont,
with a prohibition and penalty against any other person's keeping a ferry, or
transporting any persons, goods or chattels, for hire or pay, across the lake,
between the point of Cumberland Head and the north point, called Gravelly,
Point, on said Cumberland Head. An act passed May 16th, 1810, (6th vol.
_Websters & Skinner's ed._ p. 16.) makes the same grant for ten years more,
with the same prohibition and penalties, to Russel Ransom. An act passed May
26th, 1812, ( _Id._ 394.) grants, in the same way, to Peter Deall, and his
assigns, to keep a ferry across Lake Champlain, from Ticonderoga to the town
of Shoreham, in Vermont, for sixteen years, with a like prohibition and
penalties for carrying, &c. from any place on the west shore, within half a
mile north or south of Deall's dwelling house. An act, passed March 28, 1805,
(4th vol. same ed. 66.) gives to David Mayo the same right, from his landing,
in the said town of Champlain, to Windmill Point, in Vermont, for ten years,
with a like prohibition and penalty. An act, passed February 20, 1807, (5th
vol. same ed. p. 11.) gives to Peter Steenberg the same right to keep, &c. a
ferry between the south west point of Carlton Island and the outlet of Lake
Ontario, (the high road to Canada,) with the same prohibition and penalty.

_In Georgia_ , by an act of the 14th December, 1809, an exclusive right is
given to Joseph Hill, &c. for one hundred years, to erect three toll bridges
across the Savannah and its branches, (dividing South Carolina and Georgia,) a
little above the city of Savannah, on the road between it and Charleston; and
it prohibits any person's erecting a toll bridge across the said river
Savannah, up or down it, within five miles of the city. An act of December 6,
1813, authorized John Hill to establish a ferry from Savannah to Proctor's
Point, till he has built his bridges. An act of 15th of December, 1809, gives
to William Garritt and Le Roy Hammond a right to make a toll bridge, and exact
toll, across the Savannah river, from a place on the Georgia side, opposite
Campbletown; and to Walter Leigh and Edward Rowell a similar bridge, &c. over
the Savannah river, at Augusta. An act of December 5, 1800, gives to
commissioners the right to establish a ferry over the river Savannah, at
Augusta; the tolls to be for the benefit of the academy of Richmond county;
which, perhaps, the appellant's counsel may think at variance with his
position, that no State has a right to derive revenue by tolls on the trade or
intercourse between two States. The same law prohibits any other ferry or
bridge between Williams' ferry, opposite Fort Moore's bluff, and Ray's ferry,
opposite Campbletown. An act of 6th of December, 1813, gives a ferry across
the Savannah, to Ezekiel Dubze; and another is given to Zachariah Bowman and
Daniel Tucker. An act, passed 9th of November, 1814, on the express ground of
facilitating intercourse with South Carolina, gives to John M'Kinne and Henry
Shultz, for twenty years, an exclusive right to a toll bridge over the
Savannah, from Augusta, or within four miles thereof; and prohibits the
establishing of any other toll bridge over the Savannah, from Augusta, or
within four miles above or below the city.

2

_As to stages_. In the laws of _New-York_ , an act, passed March 30, 1798,
(4th vol. _Loring & Andrews' ed._ p. 399.) grants to Alexander J. Turner and
Adonijah Skinner, an exclusive right for five years, of running stages between
Lansingburgh and the town of Hampton, in the county of Washington, (i. e. to
Vermont, or the road through it to Canada.) An act, passed February 26, 1803,
(3d vol. _Webster's ed._ p. 322.) grants to T. Donally and others, the
exclusive right, for seven years, of the same kind, from the city of Albany to
the north boundary line of the State of New-Jersey. An act, passed April 6,
1807, (5th vol. _Websters & Skinner's ed._ p. 186.) grants to John Metcalf the
exclusive right, for seven years, of running stage wagons between the village
of Canandaigua and the village of Buffalo, (i. e. the road by lake Erie to
Pennsylvania, Ohio and Michigan.) (continued on p. 99)

In _Georgia_ , an act of November 25, 1802, gives to Nathaniel Twining, &c.
for ten years, the sole and exclusive right of running a line of stage
carriages between the city of Savannah and town of St. Marys, (on the borders
of Florida.) Sec. 2, gives to him an exclusive right of conveying passengers
and their baggage, _by water_ , between Darien and St. Marys, (a coasting
trade between two ports of entry, if carrying passengers be a branch of
trade,) till a post road is established. An act of December 7th, 1812, gives
to William Dunham the right of running stage carriages as above. Add to these,
the decision of Perrins v. Sikes, in 1802, ( _Day's Connect. Rep. in Err._ p.
19.) that a grant by the General Assembly, of an exclusive privilege to carry
passengers by the stage, on the post road leading to Boston, as far as the
Massachusetts line, was valid, which may be added as another legal decision on
the constitutionality of those laws. Indeed, as to the regulation of
passengers arriving in ships from foreign parts, some of the States have
exercised, at least, a concurrent power. Of that kind is the act of the State
of _New-York_ , (2 _N. R. L._ 440.) and _New-Jersey_ has passed a similar law
on 10th of February, 1819. ( _Justice's ed. N. J. Laws_ , 655.) So also in
_Massachusetts_ , (2 _Mass. Laws_ , 629.) by an act of February, 1794, masters
of vessels coming from abroad, are required to report passengers, &c. And in
_Delaware_ , (2 _Laws of Del._ ed. 1797, by _S. & J. Adams_, c. 134. p. 1354.)
an act to prevent infectious diseases, passed 24th of January, 1797, (sec. 5.)
enacts, that no master, &c. of any ship bound to any port of that State, shall
bring or import any greater number of passengers and servants than shall be
well provided and supplied with good and wholesome meat, drink, and other
necessaries, particularly vinegar, as well to wash and cleanse the vessel, as
for the use of the persons on board, during the voyage; and it directs the
size of each birth, &c.; and that if any master shall offend, &c. he shall
forfeit 600 dollars for every such offence. Sec. 7, enacts, that every master,
&c. shall pay to the physician who boards his ship, six cents for every person
he shall import or land in that State, which he is thereby authorized to
recover from such passengers and servants respectively; and the physician
shall pay over the moneys so received, to the treasurer of the trustees of the
poor in his county. Here is another instance inconsistent with the position of
the appellant's counsel, (if carrying passengers be trading,) that a State has
no right to raise a tax or revenue by foreign trade. By another act of that
State, passed February 3, 1802, the master or owner is required to give bond,
that the person so imported and landed, shall not become chargeable. If the
regulation of passengers belong to commerce, and that exclusively, (as it
must, if the power to regulate commerce be exclusive,) by what authority can a
State Court issue a _ne exeat_ against a trader or merchant about to leave the
State?

27

Vol. 1. Part 1. App. D. p. 180.

28

_p._ 309.

29

9 _Johns. Rep._ 577, 578.

30

1st vol.

31

_Ib. p._ 28.

32

1 _L. U. S._ p. 49, 50.

33

_p._ 53.

34

p. 321.

35

p. 322.

36

p. 323.

37

p. 324.

34

_p._ 321.

38

_p._ 330.

39

No. 42.

40

_New-York_ , as well as many other States, prohibited the importation and
exporation of slaves before the adoption of the constitution. The first law
was passed in February, 1788; (2 _Greenleaf_ , 85.) it prohibits the selling
of an _imported_ slave, and the buying of a slave with intent to _export_ him:
and subsequent laws have confirmed and increased the prohibition of exporting
and importing slaves. It may be proper here to observe, as applicable to this,
as well as to many other laws of the States respecting commerce, that if,
after the adoption of the constitution, the individual States have not a right
to make them, they, and all other previously made similar laws, would, by
force of that disqualification, have become inoperative.

In 1792, the State of _Virginia_ passed a law prohibiting the importation or
selling of imported slaves. (1 _Pleasants & Pace's ed._ p. 186, sec. 13.) In
_Delaware, (Laws of Del. ed. of_ 1797, _by S. & J. Adams_, p. 942.) an act
passed February 3, 1789, enacts, that if any owner, master, &c. shall fit out,
equip, man, or otherwise prepare any ship or vessel, within any port or place
in that State, or shall cause any vessel to sail from any port or place in
that State, for the purpose of carrying on a _trade or traffic_ in slaves, to,
or from, or between Europe, Asia, Africa, or America, or any places or
countries whatsoever, or of transporting slaves to or from one port or place
to another, in any part of the world, such ship, &c. her tackle, &c. shall be
forefeited to the State, and shall be liable to be seized and prosecuted _by
any afficer of the customs_ , by information, &c. And, moreover, every person
so fitting out, &c. shall severally forfeit and pay the sum of 500 pounds, one
half to the use of the State, the other half to the informer.

It further enacts, that if any person shall export, or sell, with intention to
export or carry out for sale, any negro or mulatto slave, from that State to
Marland, Virginia, either of the Carolinas, Georgia, or the West Indies,
without license or permit of five Justices, & c. he shall pay, for every slave
so exported, 100 pounds, and for every attempt so to do, 20 pounds, one half
to the use of the State, and one half to the informer. Here is a State law
minutely controlling a branch of foreign trade, and of that between the
States, and operating explicitly by the officers of the customs. It was
passed, indeed, a few weeks before the present constitution went into
operation, but long after it had been accepted by Delaware; at all events, it
is referred to, and confirmed, by an act, passed June 24, 1793, (c. 22. p.
1094.) requiring bail as to those offences.

In _Pennsylvania, (Bioren's ed._ vol. 2. p. 443.) an act was passed, March,
1788, also prohibiting _the trade;_ but, before examining it, let it be
remembered, that the first law Congress passed on that subject, was in 1794,
and that Pennsylvania had accepted the constitution in December, 1787, which,
at the time of passing this act, she had recently studied and discussed. Her
legislation, then, was not founded on, and did not rely on, any law of
Congress _in pari materid_. She not only prohibited the exportation and
importation of slaves, but, by sec. 5. of that act, prohibits _the building,
fitting out, &c._ of any vessel _for the slave trade, or to sail from the port
for that trade, under the penalty of forfeiture of the vessel, &c. and_ 1000
_pounds by qui tam_. At that time, Congress absolutely permitted the slave
trade; but, would not that law have been valid to prohibit it from that port?

_New-Jersey_ passed a law to the same purport, in March, 1798, ( _Patterson's
ed._ p. 307. _Justice's ed._ p. 371, 372, 373.) when Congress had only
prohibited, and could only prohibit, the trade as a _foreign trade_. Sec. 12,
13. prohibit the importation of slaves for sale. Sec. 17, 18, 19. prohibit
_the slave trade_ , and the fitting out of vessels, for the purpose of
transporting slaves _from one place to another_ , clearly including from one
State to another, which Congress then could not do.

_Connecticut_ , in October, 1788, after she and nine States had ratified the
constitution, ( _Hudson & Goodwin's ed._ p. 626.) forbade any citizen or
inhabitant of that State, either as master, factor, supercargo, owner, or
hirer of any vessel, directly or indirectly, to transport, or buy, or sell, or
receive on board his vessel, _with intent to cause to be transported or
imported, any of the inhabitants of Africa, as slaves_ , with _qui tam_
penalties; _and made all insurances on them void_. And, in 1792, (p. 628.) let
it be still remembered, when Congress had no such power, she enacted, that no
citizen or inhabitant of that State _should transport out of the State, for
the purpose of selling into any other State, country or kingdom_ , or buy or
sell, with intent to transport out of that State, or should sell, if
transported, &c. In Massachusetts, (1 _Laws of Mass._ 407, 408.) an act,
passed March 26, 1788, reciting the evils of the _African, trade_ , enacts,
that no citizens of that Commonwealth, or other person residing within the
same, shall, for himself or any other person, as master, factor, supercargo,
owner or hirer, in whole or in part, of any vessel, directly or indirectly,
import or transport, or buy, or sell, or receive on board his or their
vessels, with intent to cause to be imported or transported, any of the
inhabitants of any state or kingdom, in that part of the world called Africa,
as slaves, &c. under a penalty for every vessel fitted out with such intent,
and actually employed, &c. Doubtless, the laws of other States might be
produced to the same purpose, if the means of examination had been convenient;
those already cited, however, are sufficient to show, that the individual
States regulated the slave trade, _as a trade_ , both with foreign nations,
and between the States, by virtue of their own sovereign authority, after the
adoption of the constitution; but before Congress did, and before they could
do it:

41

3 _U. S. L._ p. 520.

42

_Tuck. Black._ part 1st. Appen. D. p. 251.

43

_Melcher's ed._ p. 302.

44

_p._ 304.

45

_p._ 611.

46

1 vol. p. 270.

47

_p._ 200.

48

1 vol. p. 244.

49

_p._ 313.

50

_p._ 349.

51

_Marbury & Crawford's Dig._ p. 393.

52

2 _Del. Laws_ , ed. 1797, cap. 134, p. 1354.

53

2 _Mass. Laws_ , p. 788.

54

_p._ 872.

55

2 _U. S. L._ p. 34.

56

3 _U. S. L._ p. 366, c. 193, s. 3.

57

2 _U. S. L._ p. 34.

58

2 _U. S. L._ p. 121.

59

For instance, as to the number of hoops on, and size of barrels or casks, (2
_N. R. L. of N. Y._ p. 321. s. 5. p. 325. s. 3. p. 330. s. 3, 4. 1 _Laws of
Maryland, Maxey's ed._ 218\. 1 _Vir. Laws, Pace & Pleasant's ed._ p. 352. s.
3. p. 350. s. 3. _Laws of Conn. Hudson & Goodwin's ed._ p. 394. s. 1, 2. 5, 6.
8, 9.) as to quantity as well as quality or kind, of their contents. What
pieces of beef or pork, (2 _N. R. L. of N. Y._ p. 326. s. 4. p. 326. s. 5. 9.
p. 327. s. 11.) or quantity and size of nails should be in one cask, ( _Laws
of N. H. Melcher's ed._ 386\. _Laws of Conn._ p. 394. s. 2. p. 256. s. 2.) or
the length, breadth, and thickness of staves and heading, lumber, boards,
shingles, &c. (2 _N. R. L. of N. Y._ p. 336. s. 1. 1 _Laws of Vir._ 237\.
_Laws of Conn._ p. 397. s. 21.) These regulations have no object but to
improve our _foreign_ trade, and raise the character and reputation of the
articles in a foreign market; and if the States have no right to pass laws
prohibiting exportation, what can prevent a person having an inferior article,
from exporting it, in its uninspected state, and taking his chance for the
price it might bring in a foreign market?

These laws are much too numerous and complicated to be detailed; but a very
slight examination of some of them will show the very extensive powers for
regulating commerce, possessed by the Legislatures from which they emanate.
Some operate by the _forfeiture_ of the uninspected article, as in the New-
York act for inspecting pot and pearl ashes. (2 _N. R. L._ p. 335. s. 8.) It
gives the liberty of _entering on board of any ship_ , &c. to search for any
pot or pearl ashes, shipped or shipping for exportation; and, if any unbranded
be discovered, _it is forfeited_ , and the captain subject to a pecuniary
fine. A similar _forfeiture_ is given in the same State, (p. 339. s. 8.) and a
penalty on the master. (p. 339, 340. s. 10.) In Kentucky, a similar
_forfeiture_ is given, for attempting to export unbranded flour. ( _Ky. Laws,
Toulman's ed._ 440.) In New-Hampshire, a like _forfeiture_ is given of
unpacked beef or pork shipped fro exportation. ( _Naws of N. H._ p. 387, 388.)
And in Connecticut, a _forfeiture_ is given of unbranded nails. ( _Laws of
Conn._ p. 527. s. 5.) Virginia has enacted a _forfeiture_ of unbranded fish,
and a penalty on the master. (1 _Laws of Va._ p. 353. s. 6.) She has not only
done the same in respect to lumber, but she has gone much farther, _and acted
on the collector and officers of the customs_. (1 _Laws of Va._ p. 238. s. 4.)
The collector, or other proper officer of the customs, is thereby _charged and
directed_ not to suffer any vessel to clear from his office, unless the
master, &c. shall produce inspection notes or certificates, &c. and make oath
that he has no lumber on board, but what is entered on his manifest. To this
exercise of power, equal to that of Congress itself, I probably shall be told,
that Congress has, in the collection laws, directed the collectors to pay
regard to the inspection laws of the respective States. That is at least an
admission that they are _rightfully made;_ but the answer is entirely
insufficient; for the first act of the United States, directing this, was
passed the 2d of March, 1799, and the act of Virginia, that I have last
referred to, was passed the 26th of December, 1792. In like manner, the laws
of the same State give a _forfeiture_ of uninspected tobacco, about to be
exported, and similar duties are imposed on the master and collector. (1 _Laws
of Va._ p. 263. s. 27. p. 269. s. 45. p. 271. s. 49.) This law was also passed
in November, 1792. Connecticut, too, gives a forfeiture of unsurveyed tobacco;
(1 _Laws of Conn._ p. 395. s. 13.) and, as to provisions, it also enacts a
penalty against the master, and imposes a duty on the collector. (p. 397. s.
20. p. 303. s. 11. p. 407. s. 3.)

Several of those inspection acts regulate as to the _importation_ of articles,
equally with their _exportation_. The New-York act, relative to the inspection
of sole leather, expressly says, 'Whether such leather be manufactured within
the same, _or imported or brought into it from any place whatsoever_.' (2 _N.
R. L._ p. 340. s. 2.) In Maryland, the act for the inspection of salted
provisions, _exported and imported_ from and to Baltimore, relates to beef,
pork and fish ' _imported_ into the said town, from any part of this State,
_or any one of the United States, or from any foreign port whatever_.' (2
_Laws of Maryland_ , p. 3. s. 5.) Sec. 6 relates to the size, quality, and
make of all _imported_ beef and pork barrels. This act, it is true, was passed
in 1786, before the adoption of the constitution. If the power of Congress,
however, was exclusive, it should then have ceased to operate. But the
argument does not stop there. In 1796, it was extended to Havre de Grace, (p.
335. s. 9.) and in 1797 to Chester. (p. 369. s. 9.) The act of the same State,
for the gauge of barrels for pork, beef, pitch, tar and turpentine, and tare
of barrels for flour and bread, continued by several statutes down to 1810,
and probably to the present time, prohibits the _importation_ , by land or
water, of those articles, except in barrels of certain dimensions and
contents. In Virginia, the act for the inspection of fish, passed in December,
1795, sec. 6. provides for the inspection of _imported_ fish, as well as of
that packed for exportation; and it also enacts a _forfeiture_ of the article,
and a penalty on the master. (1 _Laws of Va._ p. 352. s. 3.) In Pennsylvania,
the act providing for the inspection of gunpowder, relates to the inspection
of _imported_ as well as manufactured; and gives a _forfeiture_ of the article
for selling _imported_ gunpowder without inspection. (3 _Laws of Penn._ p.
240.) And an antecedent law of March, 1787, directs the captain of every
vessel, _importing_ gunpowder into the port of Philadelphia, under a penalty
and _forfeiture_ of the article, if it be his own property, to deliver it at a
magazine, and directs the health officer to give strangers notice of the act,
and also _enjoins the custom-house and naval officers, and their deputies_ ,
to do the same.' (2 _Laws of Penn._ p. 402. s. 3.) In New-Hampshire, ( _Laws
of N. H. ed. of_ 1815\. p. 460.) by the act relating to gunpowder, sec. 2. it
is enacted, that every master of any merchant vessel bringing gunpowder into
Portsmouth, shall, within forty-eight hours, deposit it in a magazine, and, on
neglect, shall pay a fine of 30 pounds to the poor of Portsmouth. Sec. 13.
directs a keeper of the magazine to be chosen, who shall be entitled to a fee
on all he shall receive and deliver out; another instance of what the
appellant's counsel has declared to be unconstitutional, the raising of
revenue by a State law from foreign commerce. In dassachusetts, (2 _Mass.
Laws_ , p. 37.) the act of June 19, 1801, sec. 1. directs _imported_
gunpowder, landed at the port of Boston, to be deposited in a magazine. And by
sec. 3. no gunpowder shall be kept on board any ship or other vessel, lying to
or grounded at any wharf in Boston, under pain of confiscation and pecuniary
penalty.

More extensive examinations would produce a much greater variety of
regulations of foreign commerce, and that between the States, made by State
Legislatures; but only one more instance need be added, not indeed coming
under any of the preceding heads. In Virginia, the act laying taxes for the
support of government, passed in January, 1799, prohibits _unlicensed
merchants_ from selling, by wholesale or retail, goods of _foreign_ growth or
manufacture, on land, _or on board of any vessel_. (1 _Laws of Va._ p. 386. s.
2.) The same law has been renewed, from time to time, and it probably exists
at this day.

60

1 _L. U. S._ p. 475. _ed._ 1815.

61

_The Federalist_ , No. 32.

62

9 _Johns. Rep._ p. 568.

63

9 _Johns. Rep._ p. 575, 576.

64

4 _Wheat. Rep._ 196.

65

5 _Wheat. Rep._ 49.

66

2 _U. S. L._ p. 6.

67

2 _U. S. L._ p. 7.

68

_Ib._ p. 35. 42.

69

2 _U. S. L._ p. 6.

70

_Ib._ p. 43. s. 23.

71

_Ib._ p. 42, 43.

72

2 _U. S. L._ p. 119, 120.

73

_Ib._ p. 332.

74

2 _U. S. L._ p. 335.

75

_Id._ p. 343.

76

_Id._ p. 346.

77

4 _U. S. L._ p. 393.

78

17 _Johns. Rep._ p. 488.

79

_The Federalist_ , No. 32.

80

4 _Wheat. Rep._ 168.

81

9 _Johns. Rep._ 567, 568.

82

2 _Greenleaf's ed. of the Laws_ , p. 271.

83

p. 269.

84

3 _Dallas' Rep._ 394.

85

_Act of Feb._ 21, 1793, s. 1.

86

Chirac v. Chirac, 2 _Wheat. Rep._ 269.

87

_The Federalist_ , No. 42.

88

Sturges v. Crowninshield, 4 _Wheat. Rep._ 122.

89

17 _Vin._ 211.

90

_Tucker's Bl. Com. part_ 1\. _Appx._ 180.

91

_Mr. Webster_.

92

2 _U. S. L._ p. 545. 3 _U. S. L._ p. 126.

93

3 _U. S. L._ p. 529.

94

_Dr. Witherspoon_.

95

_January_ 21, 1786.

