**545 U.S. 1 (2005)**

# GONZALES, ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL.  
v.  
RAICH ET AL.

No. 03-1454.

**Supreme Court of United States.**

Argued November 29, 2004. Decided June 6, 2005. CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED
STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT

*2 *3 STEVENS, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which KENNEDY, SOUTER, GINSBURG, and BREYER, JJ., joined. SCALIA, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, _post,_ p. 33. O'CONNOR, J., filed a dissenting *4 opinion, in which REHNQUIST, C. J., and THOMAS, J., joined as to all but Part III, _post,_ p. 42. THOMAS, J., filed a dissenting opinion, _post,_ p. 57.

_Acting Solicitor General Clement_ argued the cause for petitioners. With him
on the briefs were _Assistant Attorney General Keisler, Deputy Solicitor
General Kneedler, Lisa S. Blatt, Mark B. Stern, Alisa B. Klein,_ and _Mark T.
Quinlivan._

_Randy E. Barnett_ argued the cause for respondents. With him on the brief
were _Robert A. Long, Jr., Heidi C. Doerhoff, Robert A. Raich,_ and _David M.
Michael._ [*]

*5 JUSTICE STEVENS delivered the opinion of the Court.

California is one of at least nine States that authorize the use of marijuana
for medicinal purposes.[1] The question presented in this case is whether the
power vested in Congress by Article I, § 8, of the Constitution "[t]o make all
Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into Execution" its
authority to "regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several
States" includes the power to prohibit the local cultivation and use of
marijuana in compliance with California law.

## I

California has been a pioneer in the regulation of marijuana. In 1913,
California was one of the first States to prohibit the sale and possession of
marijuana,[2] and at the end of the century, California became the first State
to authorize limited use of the drug for medicinal purposes. In 1996,
California voters passed Proposition 215, now codified as the Compassionate
Use Act of 1996.[3] The proposition was designed *6 to ensure that "seriously
ill" residents of the State have access to marijuana for medical purposes, and
to encourage Federal and State Governments to take steps toward ensuring the
safe and affordable distribution of the drug to patients in need.[4] The Act
creates an exemption from criminal prosecution for physicians,[5] as well as
for patients and primary caregivers who possess or cultivate marijuana for
medicinal purposes with the recommendation or approval of a physician.[6] A
"primary caregiver" is a person who has consistently assumed responsibility
for the housing, health, or safety of the patient.[7]

Respondents Angel Raich and Diane Monson are California residents who suffer
from a variety of serious medical conditions and have sought to avail
themselves of medical marijuana pursuant to the terms of the Compassionate Use
*7 Act. They are being treated by licensed, board-certified family
practitioners, who have concluded, after prescribing a host of conventional
medicines to treat respondents' conditions and to alleviate their associated
symptoms, that marijuana is the only drug available that provides effective
treatment. Both women have been using marijuana as a medication for several
years pursuant to their doctors' recommendation, and both rely heavily on
cannabis to function on a daily basis. Indeed, Raich's physician believes that
forgoing cannabis treatments would certainly cause Raich excruciating pain and
could very well prove fatal.

Respondent Monson cultivates her own marijuana, and ingests the drug in a
variety of ways including smoking and using a vaporizer. Respondent Raich, by
contrast, is unable to cultivate her own, and thus relies on two caregivers,
litigating as "John Does," to provide her with locally grown marijuana at no
charge. These caregivers also process the cannabis into hashish or keif, and
Raich herself processes some of the marijuana into oils, balms, and foods for
consumption.

On August 15, 2002, county deputy sheriffs and agents from the federal Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) came to Monson's home. After a thorough
investigation, the county officials concluded that her use of marijuana was
entirely lawful as a matter of California law. Nevertheless, after a 3-hour
standoff, the federal agents seized and destroyed all six of her cannabis
plants.

Respondents thereafter brought this action against the Attorney General of the
United States and the head of the DEA seeking injunctive and declaratory
relief prohibiting the enforcement of the federal Controlled Substances Act
(CSA), 84 Stat. 1242, 21 U. S. C. § 801 _et seq.,_ to the extent it prevents
them from possessing, obtaining, or manufacturing cannabis for their personal
medical use. In their complaint and supporting affidavits, Raich and Monson
described the severity of their afflictions, their repeatedly futile attempts
*8 to obtain relief with conventional medications, and the opinions of their
doctors concerning their need to use marijuana. Respondents claimed that
enforcing the CSA against them would violate the Commerce Clause, the Due
Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment, the Ninth and Tenth Amendments of the
Constitution, and the doctrine of medical necessity.

The District Court denied respondents' motion for a preliminary injunction.
_Raich_ v. _Ashcroft,_ 248 F. Supp. 2d 918 (ND Cal. 2003). Although the court
found that the federal enforcement interests "wane[d]" when compared to the
harm that California residents would suffer if denied access to medically
necessary marijuana, it concluded that respondents could not demonstrate a
likelihood of success on the merits of their legal claims. _Id.,_ at 931.

A divided panel of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed and
ordered the District Court to enter a preliminary injunction.[8] _Raich_ v.
_Ashcroft,_ 352 F.3d 1222 (2003). The court found that respondents had
"demonstrated a strong likelihood of success on their claim that, as applied
to them, the CSA is an unconstitutional exercise of Congress' Commerce Clause
authority." _Id.,_ at 1227. The Court of Appeals distinguished prior Circuit
cases upholding the CSA in the face of Commerce Clause challenges by focusing
on what it deemed to be the _"separate and distinct class of activities"_ at
issue in this case: "the intrastate, noncommercial cultivation and possession
of cannabis for personal medical purposes as recommended by a patient's
physician pursuant to valid California state law." _Id.,_ at 1228. The *9
court found the latter class of activities "different in kind from drug
trafficking" because interposing a physician's recommendation raises different
health and safety concerns, and because "this limited use is clearly distinct
from the broader illicit drug marketas well as any broader commercial market
for medicinal marijuanainsofar as the medicinal marijuana at issue in this
case is not intended for, nor does it enter, the stream of commerce." _Ibid._

The majority placed heavy reliance on our decisions in _United States_ v.
_Lopez,_ 514 U. S. 549 (1995), and _United States_ v. _Morrison,_ 529 U. S.
598 (2000), as interpreted by recent Circuit precedent, to hold that this
separate class of purely local activities was beyond the reach of federal
power. In contrast, the dissenting judge concluded that the CSA, as applied to
respondents, was clearly valid under _Lopez_ and _Morrison;_ moreover, he
thought it "simply impossible to distinguish the relevant conduct surrounding
the cultivation and use of the marijuana crop at issue in this case from the
cultivation and use of the wheat crop that affected interstate commerce in
_Wickard_ v. _Filburn._ " 352 F. 3d, at 1235 (opinion of Beam, J.) (citation
omitted).

The obvious importance of the case prompted our grant of certiorari. 542 U. S.
936 (2004). The case is made difficult by respondents' strong arguments that
they will suffer irreparable harm because, despite a congressional finding to
the contrary, marijuana does have valid therapeutic purposes. The question
before us, however, is not whether it is wise to enforce the statute in these
circumstances; rather, it is whether Congress' power to regulate interstate
markets for medicinal substances encompasses the portions of those markets
that are supplied with drugs produced and consumed locally. Well-settled law
controls our answer. The CSA is a valid exercise of federal power, even as
applied to the troubling facts of this case. We accordingly vacate the
judgment of the Court of Appeals.

##  *10 II

Shortly after taking office in 1969, President Nixon declared a national "war
on drugs."[9] As the first campaign of that war, Congress set out to enact
legislation that would consolidate various drug laws on the books into a
comprehensive statute, provide meaningful regulation over legitimate sources
of drugs to prevent diversion into illegal channels, and strengthen law
enforcement tools against the traffic in illicit drugs.[10] That effort
culminated in the passage of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and
Control Act of 1970, 84 Stat. 1236.

This was not, however, Congress' first attempt to regulate the national market
in drugs. Rather, as early as 1906 Congress enacted federal legislation
imposing labeling regulations on medications and prohibiting the manufacture
or shipment of any adulterated or misbranded drug traveling in interstate
commerce.[11] Aside from these labeling restrictions, most domestic drug
regulations prior to 1970 generally came in the guise of revenue laws, with
the Department of the Treasury serving as the Federal Government's primary
enforcer.[12] For example, the primary drug control law, before being repealed
by the passage of the CSA, was the Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914, 38 Stat.
785 (repealed 1970). The Harrison Act sought to exert control over the
possession and sale of narcotics, specifically cocaine and opiates, by
requiring producers, distributors, and purchasers to register with the Federal
Government, by assessing taxes against *11 parties so registered, and by
regulating the issuance of prescriptions.[13]

Marijuana itself was not significantly regulated by the Federal Government
until 1937 when accounts of marijuana's addictive qualities and physiological
effects, paired with dissatisfaction with enforcement efforts at state and
local levels, prompted Congress to pass the Marihuana Tax Act, 50 Stat. 551
(repealed 1970).[14] Like the Harrison Act, the Marihuana Tax Act did not
outlaw the possession or sale of marijuana outright. Rather, it imposed
registration and reporting requirements for all individuals importing,
producing, selling, or dealing in marijuana, and required the payment of
annual taxes in addition to transfer taxes whenever the drug changed
hands.[15] Moreover, doctors wishing to prescribe marijuana for medical
purposes were required to comply with rather burdensome administrative
requirements.[16] Noncompliance exposed traffickers to severe federal
penalties, whereas compliance would often subject them to prosecution under
state law.[17] Thus, while the Marihuana Tax Act did not declare the drug
illegal _per se,_ the onerous administrative requirements, the prohibitively
expensive taxes, and the risks attendant on compliance practically curtailed
the marijuana trade.

Then in 1970, after declaration of the national "war on drugs," federal drug
policy underwent a significant transformation. A number of noteworthy events
precipitated *12 this policy shift. First, in _Leary_ v. _United States,_ 395
U. S. 6 (1969), this Court held certain provisions of the Marihuana Tax Act
and other narcotics legislation unconstitutional. Second, at the end of his
term, President Johnson fundamentally reorganized the federal drug control
agencies. The Bureau of Narcotics, then housed in the Department of Treasury,
merged with the Bureau of Drug Abuse Control, then housed in the Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW), to create the Bureau of Narcotics and
Dangerous Drugs, currently housed in the Department of Justice.[18] Finally,
prompted by a perceived need to consolidate the growing number of piecemeal
drug laws and to enhance federal drug enforcement powers, Congress enacted the
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act.[19]

Title II of that Act, the CSA, repealed most of the earlier antidrug laws in
favor of a comprehensive regime to combat the international and interstate
traffic in illicit drugs. The main objectives of the CSA were to conquer drug
abuse and to control the legitimate and illegitimate traffic in controlled
substances.[20] Congress was particularly concerned with the *13 need to
prevent the diversion of drugs from legitimate to illicit channels.[21]

To effectuate these goals, Congress devised a closed regulatory system making
it unlawful to manufacture, distribute, dispense, or possess any controlled
substance except in a manner authorized by the CSA. 21 U. S. C. §§ 841(a)(1),
844(a). The CSA categorizes all controlled substances into five schedules. §
812. The drugs are grouped together based on their accepted medical uses, the
potential for abuse, and their psychological and physical effects on the body.
*14 §§ 811, 812. Each schedule is associated with a distinct set of controls
regarding the manufacture, distribution, and use of the substances listed
therein. §§ 821-830. The CSA and its implementing regulations set forth strict
requirements regarding registration, labeling and packaging, production
quotas, drug security, and recordkeeping. _Ibid.;_ 21 CFR § 1301 _et seq._
(2004).

In enacting the CSA, Congress classified marijuana as a Schedule I drug. 21 U.
S. C. § 812(c). This preliminary classification was based, in part, on the
recommendation of the Assistant Secretary of HEW "that marihuana be retained
within schedule I at least until the completion of certain studies now
underway."[22] Schedule I drugs are categorized as such because of their high
potential for abuse, lack of any accepted medical use, and absence of any
accepted safety for use in medically supervised treatment. § 812(b)(1). These
three factors, in varying gradations, are also used to categorize drugs in the
other four schedules. For example, Schedule II substances also have a high
potential for abuse which may lead to severe psychological or physical
dependence, but unlike Schedule I drugs, they have a currently accepted
medical use. § 812(b)(2). By classifying marijuana as a Schedule I drug, as
opposed to listing it on a lesser schedule, the manufacture, distribution, or
possession of marijuana became a criminal offense, with the sole exception
being use of the drug as part of a Food and Drug Administration pre-approved
research study. §§ 823(f), 841(a)(1), 844(a); see also _United States_ v.
_Oakland Cannabis Buyers' Cooperative,_ 532 U. S. 483, 490 (2001).

The CSA provides for the periodic updating of schedules and delegates
authority to the Attorney General, after consultation with the Secretary of
Health and Human Services, to add, remove, or transfer substances to, from, or
between *15 schedules. § 811. Despite considerable efforts to reschedule
marijuana, it remains a Schedule I drug.[23]

## III

Respondents in this case do not dispute that passage of the CSA, as part of
the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act, was well within
Congress' commerce power. Brief for Respondents 22, 38. Nor do they contend
that any provision or section of the CSA amounts to an unconstitutional
exercise of congressional authority. Rather, respondents' challenge is
actually quite limited; they argue that the CSA's categorical prohibition of
the manufacture and possession of marijuana as applied to the intrastate
manufacture and possession of marijuana for medical purposes pursuant to
California law exceeds Congress' authority under the Commerce Clause.

In assessing the validity of congressional regulation, none of our Commerce
Clause cases can be viewed in isolation. As charted in considerable detail in
_United States_ v. _Lopez_ _,_ our understanding of the reach of the Commerce
Clause, as well as Congress' assertion of authority thereunder has *16 evolved
over time.[24] The Commerce Clause emerged as the Framers' response to the
central problem giving rise to the Constitution itself: the absence of any
federal commerce power under the Articles of Confederation.[25] For the first
century of our history, the primary use of the Clause was to preclude the kind
of discriminatory state legislation that had once been permissible.[26] Then,
in response to rapid industrial development and an increasingly interdependent
national economy, Congress "ushered in a new era of federal regulation under
the commerce power," beginning with the enactment of the Interstate Commerce
Act in 1887, 24 Stat. 379, and the Sherman Antitrust Act in 1890, 26 Stat.
209, as amended, 15 U. S. C. § 2 _et seq._ [27]

Cases decided during that "new era," which now spans more than a century, have
identified three general categories of regulation in which Congress is
authorized to engage under its commerce power. First, Congress can regulate
the channels of interstate commerce. _Perez_ v. _United States,_ 402 U. S.
146, 150 (1971). Second, Congress has authority to regulate and protect the
instrumentalities of interstate commerce, and persons or things in interstate
*17 commerce. _Ibid._ Third, Congress has the power to regulate activities
that substantially affect interstate commerce. _Ibid.;_ _NLRB_ v. _Jones &
Laughlin Steel Corp.,_ 301 U. S. 1, 37 (1937). Only the third category is
implicated in the case at hand.

Our case law firmly establishes Congress' power to regulate purely local
activities that are part of an economic "class of activities" that have a
substantial effect on interstate commerce. See, _e. g.,_ _Perez,_ 402 U. S.,
at 151; _Wickard_ v. _Filburn,_ 317 U. S. 111, 128-129 (1942). As we stated in
_Wickard,_ "even if appellee's activity be local and though it may not be
regarded as commerce, it may still, whatever its nature, be reached by
Congress if it exerts a substantial economic effect on interstate commerce."
_Id.,_ at 125. We have never required Congress to legislate with scientific
exactitude. When Congress decides that the "`total incidence'" of a practice
poses a threat to a national market, it may regulate the entire class. See
_Perez,_ 402 U. S., at 154-155 (quoting _Westfall_ v. _United States,_ 274 U.
S. 256, 259 (1927) ("`[W]hen it is necessary in order to prevent an evil to
make the law embrace more than the precise thing to be prevented it may do
so'")). In this vein, we have reiterated that when "`a general regulatory
statute bears a substantial relation to commerce, the _de minimis_ character
of individual instances arising under that statute is of no consequence.'" _E.
g.,_ _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 558 (emphasis deleted) (quoting _Maryland_ v.
_Wirtz,_ 392 U. S. 183, 196, n. 27 (1968)).

Our decision in _Wickard,_ 317 U. S. 111, is of particular relevance. In
_Wickard,_ we upheld the application of regulations promulgated under the
Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938, 52 Stat. 31, which were designed to
control the volume of wheat moving in interstate and foreign commerce in order
to avoid surpluses and consequent abnormally low prices. The regulations
established an allotment of 11.1 acres for Filburn's 1941 wheat crop, but he
sowed 23 acres, intending to use the excess by consuming it on his own farm.
Filburn *18 argued that even though we had sustained Congress' power to
regulate the production of goods for commerce, that power did not authorize
"federal regulation [of] production not intended in any part for commerce but
wholly for consumption on the farm." _Wickard,_ 317 U. S., at 118. Justice
Jackson's opinion for a unanimous Court rejected this submission. He wrote:

> "The effect of the statute before us is to restrict the amount which may be
> produced for market and the extent as well to which one may forestall resort
> to the market by producing to meet his own needs. That appellee's own
> contribution to the demand for wheat may be trivial by itself is not enough
> to remove him from the scope of federal regulation where, as here, his
> contribution, taken together with that of many others similarly situated, is
> far from trivial." _Id.,_ at 127-128.

_Wickard_ thus establishes that Congress can regulate purely intrastate
activity that is not itself "commercial," in that it is not produced for sale,
if it concludes that failure to regulate that class of activity would undercut
the regulation of the interstate market in that commodity.

The similarities between this case and _Wickard_ are striking. Like the farmer
in _Wickard,_ respondents are cultivating, for home consumption, a fungible
commodity for which there is an established, albeit illegal, interstate
market.[28] Just as the Agricultural Adjustment Act was designed "to *19
control the volume [of wheat] moving in interstate and foreign commerce in
order to avoid surpluses ..." and consequently control the market price,
_id.,_ at 115, a primary purpose of the CSA is to control the supply and
demand of controlled substances in both lawful and unlawful drug markets. See
nn. 20-21, _supra._ In _Wickard,_ we had no difficulty concluding that
Congress had a rational basis for believing that, when viewed in the
aggregate, leaving home-consumed wheat outside the regulatory scheme would
have a substantial influence on price and market conditions. Here too,
Congress had a rational basis for concluding that leaving home-consumed
marijuana outside federal control would similarly affect price and market
conditions.

More concretely, one concern prompting inclusion of wheat grown for home
consumption in the 1938 Act was that rising market prices could draw such
wheat into the interstate market, resulting in lower market prices. _Wickard,_
317 U. S., at 128. The parallel concern making it appropriate to include
marijuana grown for home consumption in the CSA is the likelihood that the
high demand in the interstate market will draw such marijuana into that
market. While the diversion of homegrown wheat tended to frustrate the federal
interest in stabilizing prices by regulating the volume of commercial
transactions in the interstate market, the diversion of homegrown marijuana
tends to frustrate the federal interest in eliminating commercial transactions
in the interstate market in their entirety. In both cases, the regulation is
squarely within Congress' commerce power because production of the commodity
meant for home consumption, be it wheat or marijuana, has a substantial effect
on supply and demand in the national market for that commodity.[29]

*20 Nonetheless, respondents suggest that _Wickard_ differs from this case in three respects: (1) the Agricultural Adjustment Act, unlike the CSA, exempted small farming operations; (2) _Wickard_ involved a "quintessential economic activity"a commercial farmwhereas respondents do not sell marijuana; and (3) the _Wickard_ record made it clear that the aggregate production of wheat for use on farms had a significant impact on market prices. Those differences, though factually accurate, do not diminish the precedential force of this Court's reasoning.

The fact that Filburn's own impact on the market was "trivial by itself" was
not a sufficient reason for removing him from the scope of federal regulation.
317 U. S., at 127. That the Secretary of Agriculture elected to exempt even
smaller farms from regulation does not speak to his power to regulate all
those whose aggregated production was significant, nor did that fact play any
role in the Court's analysis. Moreover, even though Filburn was indeed a
commercial farmer, the activity he was engaged inthe cultivation of wheat for
home consumptionwas not treated by the Court as part of his commercial
farming operation.[30] And while it is true that the record in the _Wickard_
case itself established the causal connection between the production for local
use and the national market, we have before us findings by Congress to the
same effect.

Findings in the introductory sections of the CSA explain why Congress deemed
it appropriate to encompass local activities within the scope of the CSA. See
n. 20, _supra._ The *21 submissions of the parties and the numerous _amici_
all seem to agree that the national, and international, market for marijuana
has dimensions that are fully comparable to those defining the class of
activities regulated by the Secretary pursuant to the 1938 statute.[31]
Respondents nonetheless insist that the CSA cannot be constitutionally applied
to their activities because Congress did not make a specific finding that the
intrastate cultivation and possession of marijuana for medical purposes based
on the recommendation of a physician would substantially affect the larger
interstate marijuana market. Be that as it may, we have never required
Congress to make particularized findings in order to legislate, see _Lopez,_
514 U. S., at 562; _Perez,_ 402 U. S., at 156, absent a special concern such
as the protection of free speech, see, _e. g.,_ _Turner Broadcasting System,
Inc._ v. _FCC,_ 512 U. S. 622, 664-668 (1994) (plurality opinion). While
congressional findings are certainly helpful in reviewing the substance of a
congressional statutory scheme, particularly when the connection to commerce
is not self-evident, and while we will consider congressional findings in our
analysis when they are available, the absence of particularized findings does
not call into question Congress' authority to legislate.[32]

*22 In assessing the scope of Congress' authority under the Commerce Clause, we stress that the task before us is a modest one. We need not determine whether respondents' activities, taken in the aggregate, substantially affect interstate commerce in fact, but only whether a "rational basis" exists for so concluding. _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 557; see also _Hodel_ v. _Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation Assn., Inc.,_ 452 U. S. 264, 276-280 (1981); _Perez,_ 402 U. S., at 155-156; _Katzenbach_ v. _McClung,_ 379 U. S. 294, 299-301 (1964); _Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc._ v. _United States,_ 379 U. S. 241, 252-253 (1964). Given the enforcement difficulties that attend distinguishing between marijuana cultivated locally and marijuana grown elsewhere, 21 U. S. C. § 801(5), and concerns about diversion into illicit channels,[33] we have no difficulty concluding that Congress had a rational basis for believing that failure to regulate the intrastate manufacture and possession of marijuana would leave a gaping hole in the CSA. Thus, as in _Wickard,_ when it enacted comprehensive legislation to regulate the interstate market in a fungible commodity, Congress was acting well within its authority to "make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper" to "regulate Commerce ... among the several States." U. S. Const., Art. I, § 8. That the regulation ensnares some purely intrastate activity is of no moment. As we have done many times before, we refuse to excise individual components of that larger scheme.

##  *23 IV

To support their contrary submission, respondents rely heavily on two of our
more recent Commerce Clause cases. In their myopic focus, they overlook the
larger context of modern-era Commerce Clause jurisprudence preserved by those
cases. Moreover, even in the narrow prism of respondents' creation, they read
those cases far too broadly.

Those two cases, of course, are _Lopez,_ 514 U. S. 549, and _Morrison,_ 529 U.
S. 598. As an initial matter, the statutory challenges at issue in those cases
were markedly different from the challenge respondents pursue in the case at
hand. Here, respondents ask us to excise individual applications of a
concededly valid statutory scheme. In contrast, in both _Lopez_ and
_Morrison,_ the parties asserted that a particular statute or provision fell
outside Congress' commerce power in its entirety. This distinction is pivotal
for we have often reiterated that "[w]here the class of activities is
regulated and that class is within the reach of federal power, the courts have
no power `to excise, as trivial, individual instances' of the class." _Perez,_
402 U. S., at 154 (emphasis deleted) (quoting _Wirtz,_ 392 U. S., at 193); see
also _Hodel,_ 452 U. S., at 308.

At issue in _Lopez,_ 514 U. S. 549, was the validity of the Gun-Free School
Zones Act of 1990, which was a brief, single-subject statute making it a crime
for an individual to possess a gun in a school zone. 104 Stat. 4844-4845, 18
U. S. C. § 922(q)(1)(A). The Act did not regulate any economic activity and
did not contain any requirement that the possession of a gun have any
connection to past interstate activity or a predictable impact on future
commercial activity. Distinguishing our earlier cases holding that
comprehensive regulatory statutes may be validly applied to local conduct that
does not, when viewed in isolation, have a significant impact on interstate
commerce, we held the statute invalid. We explained:

> *24 "Section 922(q) is a criminal statute that by its terms has nothing to
> do with `commerce' or any sort of economic enterprise, however broadly one
> might define those terms. Section 922(q) is not an essential part of a
> larger regulation of economic activity, in which the regulatory scheme could
> be undercut unless the intrastate activity were regulated. It cannot,
> therefore, be sustained under our cases upholding regulations of activities
> that arise out of or are connected with a commercial transaction, which
> viewed in the aggregate, substantially affects interstate commerce." 514 U.
> S., at 561.

The statutory scheme that the Government is defending in this litigation is at
the opposite end of the regulatory spectrum. As explained above, the CSA,
enacted in 1970 as part of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control
Act, 84 Stat. 1242-1284, was a lengthy and detailed statute creating a
comprehensive framework for regulating the production, distribution, and
possession of five classes of "controlled substances." Most of those
substancesthose listed in Schedules II through V"have a useful and
legitimate medical purpose and are necessary to maintain the health and
general welfare of the American people." 21 U. S. C. § 801(1). The regulatory
scheme is designed to foster the beneficial use of those medications, to
prevent their misuse, and to prohibit entirely the possession or use of
substances listed in Schedule I, except as a part of a strictly controlled
research project.

While the statute provided for the periodic updating of the five schedules,
Congress itself made the initial classifications. It identified 42 opiates, 22
opium derivatives, and 17 hallucinogenic substances as Schedule I drugs. 84
Stat. 1248. Marijuana was listed as the 10th item in the 3d subcategory. That
classification, unlike the discrete prohibition established by the Gun-Free
School Zones Act of 1990, was merely one of many "essential part[s] of a
larger regulation of economic activity, in which the regulatory scheme could
be undercut *25 unless the intrastate activity were regulated." _Lopez,_ 514
U. S., at 561.[34] Our opinion in _Lopez_ casts no doubt on the validity of
such a program.

Nor does this Court's holding in _Morrison,_ 529 U. S. 598. The Violence
Against Women Act of 1994, 108 Stat. 1902, created a federal civil remedy for
the victims of gender-motivated crimes of violence. 42 U. S. C. § 13981. The
remedy was enforceable in both state and federal courts, and generally
depended on proof of the violation of a state law. Despite congressional
findings that such crimes had an adverse impact on interstate commerce, we
held the statute unconstitutional because, like the statute in _Lopez,_ it did
not regulate economic activity. We concluded that "the non-economic, criminal
nature of the conduct at issue was central to our decision" in _Lopez,_ and
that our prior cases had identified a clear pattern of analysis: "`Where
economic activity substantially affects interstate commerce, legislation
regulating that activity will be sustained.'"[35] _Morrison,_ 529 U. S., at
610.

Unlike those at issue in _Lopez_ and _Morrison,_ the activities regulated by
the CSA are quintessentially economic. "Economics" refers to "the production,
distribution, and consumption of commodities." Webster's Third New
International *26 Dictionary 720 (1966). The CSA is a statute that regulates
the production, distribution, and consumption of commodities for which there
is an established, and lucrative, interstate market. Prohibiting the
intrastate possession or manufacture of an article of commerce is a rational
(and commonly utilized) means of regulating commerce in that product.[36] Such
prohibitions include specific decisions requiring that a drug be withdrawn
from the market as a result of the failure to comply with regulatory
requirements as well as decisions excluding Schedule I drugs entirely from the
market. Because the CSA is a statute that directly regulates economic,
commercial activity, our opinion in _Morrison_ casts no doubt on its
constitutionality.

The Court of Appeals was able to conclude otherwise only by isolating a
"separate and distinct" class of activities that it held to be beyond the
reach of federal power, defined as "the intrastate, non-commercial
cultivation, possession and use of marijuana for personal medical purposes on
the advice of a physician and in accordance with state law." 352 F. 3d, at
1229. The court characterized this class as "different in kind from drug
trafficking." _Id.,_ at 1228. The differences between the members of a class
so defined and the principal traffickers in Schedule I substances might be
sufficient to justify a policy decision exempting the narrower class from the
coverage of the CSA. The question, however, is whether Congress' contrary
policy judgment, _i. e.,_ its decision to include this narrower "class of
activities" within the larger regulatory scheme, was constitutionally
deficient. We have no difficulty concluding that Congress acted rationally in
determining that none of the characteristics making up the purported class,
whether viewed individually or in the aggregate, compelled an exemption from
the CSA; rather, the subdivided class of activities defined by the Court *27
of Appeals was an essential part of the larger regulatory scheme.

First, the fact that marijuana is used "for personal medical purposes on the
advice of a physician" cannot itself serve as a distinguishing factor. _Id.,_
at 1229. The CSA designates marijuana as contraband for _any_ purpose; in
fact, by characterizing marijuana as a Schedule I drug, Congress expressly
found that the drug has no acceptable medical uses. Moreover, the CSA is a
comprehensive regulatory regime specifically designed to regulate which
controlled substances can be utilized for medicinal purposes, and in what
manner. Indeed, most of the substances classified in the CSA "have a useful
and legitimate medical purpose." 21 U. S. C. § 801(1). Thus, even if
respondents are correct that marijuana does have accepted medical uses and
thus should be redesignated as a lesser schedule drug,[37] the CSA would still
impose controls beyond what is required by California law. The CSA requires
manufacturers, physicians, pharmacies, and other handlers of controlled
substances to comply with statutory and regulatory provisions mandating
registration with the DEA, compliance with specific production quotas,
security controls to guard against diversion, recordkeeping and reporting
obligations, and prescription requirements. See *28 §§ 821-830; 21 CFR § 1301
_et seq._ (2004). Furthermore, the dispensing of new drugs, even when doctors
approve their use, must await federal approval. _United States_ v.
_Rutherford,_ 442 U. S. 544 (1979). Accordingly, the mere fact that
marijuanalike virtually every other controlled substance regulated by the
CSAis used for medicinal purposes cannot possibly serve to distinguish it
from the core activities regulated by the CSA.

Nor can it serve as an "objective marke[r]" or "objective facto[r]" to
arbitrarily narrow the relevant class as the dissenters suggest, _post,_ at 47
(opinion of O'CONNOR, J.); _post,_ at 68 (opinion of THOMAS, J.). More
fundamentally, if, as the principal dissent contends, the personal
cultivation, possession, and use of marijuana for medicinal purposes is beyond
the "`outer limits' of Congress' Commerce Clause authority," _post,_ at 42
(opinion of O'CONNOR, J.), it must also be true that such personal use of
marijuana (or any other homegrown drug) for recreational purposes is also
beyond those "`outer limits,'" whether or not a State elects to authorize or
even regulate such use. JUSTICE THOMAS' separate dissent suffers from the same
sweeping implications. That is, the dissenters' rationale logically extends to
place _any_ federal regulation (including quality, prescription, or quantity
controls) of _any_ locally cultivated and possessed controlled substance for
_any_ purpose beyond the "`outer limits'" of Congress' Commerce Clause
authority. One need not have a degree in economics to understand why a
nationwide exemption for the vast quantity of marijuana (or other drugs)
locally cultivated for personal use (which presumably would include use by
friends, neighbors, and family members) may have a substantial impact on the
interstate market for this extraordinarily popular substance. The
congressional judgment that an exemption for such a significant segment of the
total market would undermine the orderly enforcement of the entire regulatory
scheme is entitled to a strong presumption of validity. Indeed, that judgment
is not only rational, but "visible to the *29 naked eye," _Lopez,_ 514 U. S.,
at 563, under any commonsense appraisal of the probable consequences of such
an open-ended exemption.

Second, limiting the activity to marijuana possession and cultivation "in
accordance with state law" cannot serve to place respondents' activities
beyond congressional reach. The Supremacy Clause unambiguously provides that
if there is any conflict between federal and state law, federal law shall
prevail. It is beyond peradventure that federal power over commerce is
"`superior to that of the States to provide for the welfare or necessities of
their inhabitants,'" however legitimate or dire those necessities may be.
_Wirtz,_ 392 U. S., at 196 (quoting _Sanitary Dist. of Chicago_ v. _United
States,_ 266 U. S. 405, 426 (1925)). See also 392 U. S., at 195-196;
_Wickard,_ 317 U. S., at 124 ("`[N]o form of state activity can
constitutionally thwart the regulatory power granted by the commerce clause to
Congress'"). Just as state acquiescence to federal regulation cannot expand
the bounds of the Commerce Clause, see, _e. g.,_ _Morrison,_ 529 U. S., at
661-662 (BREYER, J., dissenting) (noting that 38 States requested federal
intervention), so too state action cannot circumscribe Congress' plenary
commerce power. See _United States_ v. _Darby,_ 312 U. S. 100, 114 (1941)
("That power can neither be enlarged nor diminished by the exercise or non-
exercise of state power").[38]

*30 Respondents acknowledge this proposition, but nonetheless contend that their activities were not "an essential part of a larger regulatory scheme" because they had been "isolated by the State of California, and [are] policed by the State of California," and thus remain "entirely separated from the market." Tr. of Oral Arg. 27. The dissenters fall prey to similar reasoning. See n. 38, _supra,_ at 26 and this page. The notion that California law has surgically excised a discrete activity that is hermetically sealed off from the larger interstate marijuana market is a dubious proposition, and, more importantly, one that Congress could have rationally rejected.

Indeed, that the California exemptions will have a significant impact on both
the supply and demand sides of the market for marijuana is not just
"plausible" as the principal dissent concedes, _post,_ at 56 (opinion of
O'CONNOR, J.), it is readily apparent. The exemption for physicians provides
them with an economic incentive to grant their patients permission to use the
drug. In contrast to most prescriptions for legal drugs, which limit the
dosage and duration of the usage, under California law the doctor's permission
to *31 recommend marijuana use is open-ended. The authority to grant
permission whenever the doctor determines that a patient is afflicted with
"any other illness for which marijuana provides relief," Cal. Health & Safety
Code Ann. § 11362.5(b)(1)(A) (West Supp. 2005), is broad enough to allow even
the most scrupulous doctor to conclude that some recreational uses would be
therapeutic.[39] And our cases have taught us that there are some unscrupulous
physicians who overprescribe when it is sufficiently profitable to do so.[40]

The exemption for cultivation by patients and caregivers can only increase the
supply of marijuana in the California market.[41] The likelihood that all such
production will *32 promptly terminate when patients recover or will precisely
match the patients' medical needs during their convalescence seems remote;
whereas the danger that excesses will satisfy some of the admittedly enormous
demand for recreational use seems obvious.[42] Moreover, that the national and
international narcotics trade has thrived in the face of vigorous criminal
enforcement efforts suggests that no small number of unscrupulous people will
make use of the California exemptions to serve their commercial ends whenever
it is feasible to do so.[43] Taking into account the fact that California is
only one of at least nine States to have authorized the medical use of
marijuana, a fact JUSTICE O'CONNOR's dissent conveniently disregards in
arguing that the demonstrated effect on commerce while admittedly "plausible"
is ultimately "unsubstantiated," _post,_ at 56, 55, Congress could have
rationally concluded that the aggregate impact on the national market of all
the transactions exempted from federal supervision is unquestionably
substantial.

So, from the "separate and distinct" class of activities identified by the
Court of Appeals (and adopted by the dissenters), we are left with "the
intrastate, noncommercial cultivation, possession and use of marijuana." 352
F. 3d, at 1229. Thus the case for the exemption comes down to the claim that a
locally cultivated product that is used domestically *33 rather than sold on
the open market is not subject to federal regulation. Given the findings in
the CSA and the undisputed magnitude of the commercial market for marijuana,
our decisions in _Wickard_ v. _Filburn_ and the later cases endorsing its
reasoning foreclose that claim.

## V

Respondents also raise a substantive due process claim and seek to avail
themselves of the medical necessity defense. These theories of relief were set
forth in their complaint but were not reached by the Court of Appeals. We
therefore do not address the question whether judicial relief is available to
respondents on these alternative bases. We do note, however, the presence of
another avenue of relief. As the Solicitor General confirmed during oral
argument, the statute authorizes procedures for the reclassification of
Schedule I drugs. But perhaps even more important than these legal avenues is
the democratic process, in which the voices of voters allied with these
respondents may one day be heard in the halls of Congress. Under the present
state of the law, however, the judgment of the Court of Appeals must be
vacated. The case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion.

_It is so ordered._

JUSTICE SCALIA, concurring in the judgment.

I agree with the Court's holding that the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) may
validly be applied to respondents' cultivation, distribution, and possession
of marijuana for personal, medicinal use. I write separately because my
understanding of the doctrinal foundation on which that holding rests is, if
not inconsistent with that of the Court, at least more nuanced.

Since _Perez_ v. _United States,_ 402 U. S. 146 (1971), our cases have
mechanically recited that the Commerce Clause permits congressional regulation
of three categories: (1) the *34 channels of interstate commerce; (2) the
instrumentalities of interstate commerce, and persons or things in interstate
commerce; and (3) activities that "substantially affect" interstate commerce.
_Id.,_ at 150; see _United States_ v. _Morrison,_ 529 U. S. 598, 608-609
(2000); _United States_ v. _Lopez,_ 514 U. S. 549, 558-559 (1995); _Hodel_ v.
_Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation Assn., Inc.,_ 452 U. S. 264, 276-277
(1981). The first two categories are self-evident, since they are the
ingredients of interstate commerce itself. See _Gibbons_ v. _Ogden,_ 9 Wheat.
1, 189-190 (1824). The third category, however, is different in kind, and its
recitation without explanation is misleading and incomplete.

It is _misleading_ because, unlike the channels, instrumentalities, and agents
of interstate commerce, activities that substantially affect interstate
commerce are not themselves part of interstate commerce, and thus the power to
regulate them cannot come from the Commerce Clause alone. Rather, as this
Court has acknowledged since at least _United States_ v. _Coombs,_ 12 Pet. 72
(1838), Congress's regulatory authority over intrastate activities that are
not themselves part of interstate commerce (including activities that have a
substantial effect on interstate commerce) derives from the Necessary and
Proper Clause. _Id.,_ at 78; _Katzenbach_ v. _McClung,_ 379 U. S. 294, 301-302
(1964); _United States_ v. _Wrightwood Dairy Co.,_ 315 U. S. 110, 119 (1942);
_Shreveport Rate Cases,_ 234 U. S. 342, 353 (1914); _United States_ v. _E. C.
Knight Co.,_ 156 U. S. 1, 39-40 (1895) (Harlan, J., dissenting).[1] And the
category of "activities that substantially affect interstate commerce,"
_Lopez, supra,_ at 559, is _incomplete_ because the authority to enact laws
necessary and proper for the regulation of interstate commerce is not limited
to laws *35 governing intrastate activities that substantially affect
interstate commerce. Where necessary to make a regulation of interstate
commerce effective, Congress may regulate even those intrastate activities
that do not themselves substantially affect interstate commerce.

## I

Our cases show that the regulation of intrastate activities may be necessary
to and proper for the regulation of interstate commerce in two general
circumstances. Most directly, the commerce power permits Congress not only to
devise rules for the governance of commerce between States but also to
facilitate interstate commerce by eliminating potential obstructions, and to
restrict it by eliminating potential stimulants. See _NLRB_ v. _Jones &
Laughlin Steel Corp.,_ 301 U. S. 1, 36-37 (1937). That is why the Court has
repeatedly sustained congressional legislation on the ground that the
regulated activities had a substantial effect on interstate commerce. See, _e.
g.,_ _Hodel, supra,_ at 281 (surface coal mining); _Katzenbach, supra,_ at 300
(discrimination by restaurants); _Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc._ v. _United
States,_ 379 U. S. 241, 258 (1964) (discrimination by hotels); _Mandeville
Island Farms, Inc._ v. _American Crystal Sugar Co.,_ 334 U. S. 219, 237 (1948)
(intrastate price fixing); _Board of Trade of Chicago_ v. _Olsen,_ 262 U. S.
1, 40 (1923) (activities of a local grain exchange); _Stafford_ v. _Wallace,_
258 U. S. 495, 517, 524-525 (1922) (intrastate transactions at stockyard).
_Lopez_ and _Morrison_ recognized the expansive scope of Congress's authority
in this regard: "[T]he pattern is clear. Where economic activity substantially
affects interstate commerce, legislation regulating that activity will be
sustained." _Lopez, supra,_ at 560; _Morrison, supra,_ at 610 (same).

This principle is not without limitation. In _Lopez_ and _Morrison,_ the Court
 conscious of the potential of the "substantially affects" test to
"`obliterate the distinction between what is national and what is local,'"
_Lopez, supra,_ at 566-567 *36 (quoting _A. L. A. Schechter Poultry Corp._ v.
_United States,_ 295 U. S. 495, 554 (1935)); see also _Morrison, supra,_ at
615-616  rejected the argument that Congress may regulate _noneconomic_
activity based solely on the effect that it may have on interstate commerce
through a remote chain of inferences. _Lopez, supra,_ at 564-566; _Morrison,
supra,_ at 617-618. "[I]f we were to accept [such] arguments," the Court
reasoned in _Lopez,_ "we are hard pressed to posit any activity by an
individual that Congress is without power to regulate." 514 U. S., at 564; see
also _Morrison, supra,_ at 615-616. Thus, although Congress's authority to
regulate intrastate activity that substantially affects interstate commerce is
broad, it does not permit the Court to "pile inference upon inference,"
_Lopez, supra,_ at 567, in order to establish that noneconomic activity has a
substantial effect on interstate commerce.

As we implicitly acknowledged in _Lopez,_ however, Congress's authority to
enact laws necessary and proper for the regulation of interstate commerce is
not limited to laws directed against economic activities that have a
substantial effect on interstate commerce. Though the conduct in _Lopez_ was
not economic, the Court nevertheless recognized that it could be regulated as
"an essential part of a larger regulation of economic activity, in which the
regulatory scheme could be undercut unless the intrastate activity were
regulated." 514 U. S., at 561. This statement referred to those cases
permitting the regulation of intrastate activities "which in a substantial way
interfere with or obstruct the exercise of the granted power." _Wrightwood
Dairy Co., supra,_ at 119; see also _United States_ v. _Darby,_ 312 U. S. 100,
118-119 (1941); _Shreveport Rate Cases, supra,_ at 353. As the Court put it in
_Wrightwood Dairy,_ where Congress has the authority to enact a regulation of
interstate commerce, "it possesses every power needed to make that regulation
effective." 315 U. S., at 118-119.

*37 Although this power "to make ... regulation effective" commonly overlaps with the authority to regulate economic activities that substantially affect interstate commerce,[2] and may in some cases have been confused with that authority, the two are distinct. The regulation of an intrastate activity may be essential to a comprehensive regulation of interstate commerce even though the intrastate activity does not itself "substantially affect" interstate commerce. Moreover, as the passage from _Lopez_ quoted above suggests, Congress may regulate even noneconomic local activity if that regulation is a necessary part of a more general regulation of interstate commerce. See _Lopez, supra,_ at 561. The relevant question is simply whether the means chosen are "reasonably adapted" to the attainment of a legitimate end under the commerce power. See _Darby, supra,_ at 121.

In _Darby,_ for instance, the Court explained that "Congress, having ...
adopted the policy of excluding from interstate commerce all goods produced
for the commerce which do not conform to the specified labor standards," 312
U. S., at 121, could not only require employers engaged in the production of
goods for interstate commerce to conform to wage and hour standards, _id.,_ at
119-121, but could also require those employers to keep employment records in
order to demonstrate compliance with the regulatory scheme, _id.,_ at 125.
While the Court sustained the former regulation on the alternative ground that
the activity it regulated could have a "great effect" on interstate commerce,
_id.,_ at 122-123, it affirmed the latter on the sole ground that "[t]he
requirement *38 for records even of the intrastate transaction is an
appropriate means to the legitimate end," _id.,_ at 125.

As the Court said in the _Shreveport Rate Cases,_ the Necessary and Proper
Clause does not give "Congress ... the authority to regulate the internal
commerce of a State, as such," but it does allow Congress "to take all
measures necessary or appropriate to" the effective regulation of the
interstate market, "although intrastate transactions ... may thereby be
controlled." 234 U. S., at 353; see also _Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp.,
supra,_ at 38 (the logic of the _Shreveport Rate Cases_ is not limited to
instrumentalities of commerce).

## II

Today's principal dissent objects that, by permitting Congress to regulate
activities necessary to effective interstate regulation, the Court reduces
_Lopez_ and _Morrison_ to little "more than a drafting guide." _Post,_ at 46
(opinion of O'CONNOR, J.). I think that criticism unjustified. Unlike the
power to regulate activities that have a substantial effect on interstate
commerce, the power to enact laws enabling effective regulation of interstate
commerce can only be exercised in conjunction with congressional regulation of
an interstate market, and it extends only to those measures necessary to make
the interstate regulation effective. As _Lopez_ itself states, and the Court
affirms today, Congress may regulate noneconomic intrastate activities only
where the failure to do so "could ... undercut" its regulation of interstate
commerce. See _Lopez, supra,_ at 561; _ante,_ at 18, 24-25. This is not a
power that threatens to obliterate the line between "what is truly national
and what is truly local." _Lopez, supra,_ at 567-568.

_Lopez_ and _Morrison_ affirm that Congress may not regulate certain "purely
local" activity within the States based solely on the attenuated effect that
such activity may have in the interstate market. But those decisions do not
declare noneconomic intrastate activities to be categorically beyond *39 the
reach of the Federal Government. Neither case involved the power of Congress
to exert control over intrastate activities in connection with a more
comprehensive scheme of regulation; _Lopez_ expressly disclaimed that it was
such a case, 514 U. S., at 561, and _Morrison_ did not even discuss the
possibility that it was. (The Court of Appeals in _Morrison_ made clear that
it was not. See _Brzonkala_ v. _Virginia Polytechnic Inst.,_ 169 F. 3d 820,
834-835 (CA4 1999) (en banc).) To dismiss this distinction as "superficial and
formalistic," see _post,_ at 47 (O'CONNOR, J., dissenting), is to
misunderstand the nature of the Necessary and Proper Clause, which empowers
Congress to enact laws in effectuation of its enumerated powers that are not
within its authority to enact in isolation. See _McCulloch_ v. _Maryland,_ 4
Wheat. 316, 421-422 (1819).

And there are other restraints upon the Necessary and Proper Clause authority.
As Chief Justice Marshall wrote in _McCulloch_ v. _Maryland_ _,_ even when the
end is constitutional and legitimate, the means must be "appropriate" and
"plainly adapted" to that end. _Id.,_ at 421. Moreover, they may not be
otherwise "prohibited" and must be "consistent with the letter and spirit of
the constitution." _Ibid._ These phrases are not merely hortatory. For
example, cases such as _Printz_ v. _United States,_ 521 U. S. 898 (1997), and
_New York_ v. _United States,_ 505 U. S. 144 (1992), affirm that a law is not
"` _proper_ for carrying into Execution the Commerce Clause'" "[w]hen [it]
violates [a constitutional] principle of state sovereignty." _Printz, supra,_
at 923-924; see also _New York, supra,_ at 166.

## III

The application of these principles to the case before us is straightforward.
In the CSA, Congress has undertaken to extinguish the interstate market in
Schedule I controlled substances, including marijuana. The Commerce Clause
unquestionably permits this. The power to regulate interstate commerce
"extends not only to those regulations which aid, *40 foster and protect the
commerce, but embraces those which prohibit it." _Darby, supra,_ at 113. See
also _Hipolite Egg Co._ v. _United States,_ 220 U. S. 45, 58 (1911); _Lottery
Case,_ 188 U. S. 321, 354 (1903). To effectuate its objective, Congress has
prohibited almost all intrastate activities related to Schedule I substances 
both economic activities (manufacture, distribution, possession with the
intent to distribute) and noneconomic activities (simple possession). See 21
U. S. C. §§ 841(a), 844(a). That simple possession is a noneconomic activity
is immaterial to whether it can be prohibited as a necessary part of a larger
regulation. Rather, Congress's authority to enact all of these prohibitions of
intrastate controlled-substance activities depends only upon whether they are
appropriate means of achieving the legitimate end of eradicating Schedule I
substances from interstate commerce.

By this measure, I think the regulation must be sustained. Not only is it
impossible to distinguish "controlled substances manufactured and distributed
intrastate" from "controlled substances manufactured and distributed
interstate," but it hardly makes sense to speak in such terms. Drugs like
marijuana are fungible commodities. As the Court explains, marijuana that is
grown at home and possessed for personal use is never more than an instant
from the interstate market  and this is so whether or not the possession is
for medicinal use or lawful use under the laws of a particular State.[3]*41
See _ante,_ at 25-33. Congress need not accept on faith that state law will be
effective in maintaining a strict division between a lawful market for
"medical" marijuana and the more general marijuana market. See _ante,_ at 30,
and n. 38. "To impose on [Congress] the necessity of resorting to means which
it cannot control, which another government may furnish or withhold, would
render its course precarious, the result of its measures uncertain, and create
a dependence on other governments, which might disappoint its most important
designs, and is incompatible with the language of the constitution."
_McCulloch,_ 4 Wheat., at 424.

Finally, neither respondents nor the dissenters suggest any violation of state
sovereignty of the sort that would render this regulation "inappropriate,"
_id.,_ at 421  except to argue that the CSA regulates an area typically left
to state regulation. See _post,_ at 48, 51 (opinion of O'CONNOR, J.); _post,_
at 66 (opinion of THOMAS, J.); Brief for Respondents 39-42. That is not enough
to render federal regulation an inappropriate means. The Court has repeatedly
recognized that, if authorized by the commerce power, Congress may regulate
private endeavors "even when [that regulation] may pre-empt express state-law
determinations contrary to the result which has commended itself to the
collective wisdom of Congress." _National League of Cities_ v. _Usery,_ 426 U.
S. 833, 840 (1976); see _Cleveland_ v. _United States,_ 329 U. S. 14, 19
(1946); _McCulloch, supra,_ at 424. At bottom, respondents' *42 state-
sovereignty argument reduces to the contention that federal regulation of the
activities permitted by California's Compassionate Use Act is not sufficiently
necessary to be "necessary and proper" to Congress's regulation of the
interstate market. For the reasons given above and in the Court's opinion, I
cannot agree.

## * * *

I thus agree with the Court that, however the class of regulated activities is
subdivided, Congress could reasonably conclude that its objective of
prohibiting marijuana from the interstate market "could be undercut" if those
activities were excepted from its general scheme of regulation. See _Lopez,_
514 U. S., at 561. That is sufficient to authorize the application of the CSA
to respondents.

JUSTICE O'CONNOR, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and JUSTICE THOMAS join as to
all but Part III, dissenting.

We enforce the "outer limits" of Congress' Commerce Clause authority not for
their own sake, but to protect historic spheres of state sovereignty from
excessive federal encroachment and thereby to maintain the distribution of
power fundamental to our federalist system of government. _United States_ v.
_Lopez,_ 514 U. S. 549, 557 (1995); _NLRB_ v. _Jones & Laughlin Steel Corp.,_
301 U. S. 1, 37 (1937). One of federalism's chief virtues, of course, is that
it promotes innovation by allowing for the possibility that "a single
courageous State may, if its citizens choose, serve as a laboratory; and try
novel social and economic experiments without risk to the rest of the
country." _New State Ice Co._ v. _Liebmann,_ 285 U. S. 262, 311 (1932)
(Brandeis, J., dissenting).

This case exemplifies the role of States as laboratories. The States' core
police powers have always included authority to define criminal law and to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of their citizens. _Brecht_ v.
_Abrahamson,_ 507 U. S. 619, 635 (1993); _Whalen_ v. _Roe,_ 429 U. S. 589,
603, *43 n. 30 (1977). Exercising those powers, California (by ballot
initiative and then by legislative codification) has come to its own
conclusion about the difficult and sensitive question of whether marijuana
should be available to relieve severe pain and suffering. Today the Court
sanctions an application of the federal Controlled Substances Act that
extinguishes that experiment, without any proof that the personal cultivation,
possession, and use of marijuana for medicinal purposes, if economic activity
in the first place, has a substantial effect on interstate commerce and is
therefore an appropriate subject of federal regulation. In so doing, the Court
announces a rule that gives Congress a perverse incentive to legislate broadly
pursuant to the Commerce Clause  nestling questionable assertions of its
authority into comprehensive regulatory schemes  rather than with precision.
That rule and the result it produces in this case are irreconcilable with our
decisions in _Lopez, supra,_ and _United States_ v. _Morrison,_ 529 U. S. 598
(2000). Accordingly I dissent.

## I

In _Lopez,_ we considered the constitutionality of the Gun-Free School Zones
Act of 1990, which made it a federal offense "for any individual knowingly to
possess a firearm ... at a place that the individual knows, or has reasonable
cause to believe, is a school zone," 18 U. S. C. § 922(q)(2)(A). We explained
that "Congress' commerce authority includes the power to regulate those
activities having a substantial relation to interstate commerce ..., _i. e.,_
those activities that substantially affect interstate commerce." 514 U. S., at
558-559 (citation omitted). This power derives from the conjunction of the
Commerce Clause and the Necessary and Proper Clause. _Garcia_ v. _San Antonio
Metropolitan Transit Authority,_ 469 U. S. 528, 585-586 (1985) (O'CONNOR, J.,
dissenting) (explaining that _United States_ v. _Darby,_ 312 U. S. 100 (1941),
_United States_ v. _Wrightwood Dairy Co.,_ 315 U. S. 110 (1942), and _Wickard_
v. _Filburn,_ 317 U. S. 111 (1942), *44 based their expansion of the commerce
power on the Necessary and Proper Clause, and that "the reasoning of these
cases underlies every recent decision concerning the reach of Congress to
activities affecting interstate commerce"); _ante,_ at 34 (SCALIA, J.,
concurring in judgment). We held in _Lopez_ that the Gun-Free School Zones Act
could not be sustained as an exercise of that power.

Our decision about whether gun possession in school zones substantially
affected interstate commerce turned on four considerations. _Lopez, supra,_ at
559-567; see also _Morrison, supra,_ at 609-613. First, we observed that our
"substantial effects" cases generally have upheld federal regulation of
economic activity that affected interstate commerce, but that § 922(q) was a
criminal statute having "nothing to do with `commerce' or any sort of economic
enterprise." _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 561. In this regard, we also noted that
"[s]ection 922(q) is not an essential part of a larger regulation of economic
activity, in which the regulatory scheme could be undercut unless the
intrastate activity were regulated. It cannot, therefore, be sustained under
our cases upholding regulations of activities that arise out of or are
connected with a commercial transaction, which viewed in the aggregate,
substantially affects interstate commerce." _Ibid._ Second, we noted that the
statute contained no express jurisdictional requirement establishing its
connection to interstate commerce. _Ibid._

Third, we found telling the absence of legislative findings about the
regulated conduct's impact on interstate commerce. We explained that while
express legislative findings are neither required nor, when provided,
dispositive, findings "enable us to evaluate the legislative judgment that the
activity in question substantially affect[s] interstate commerce, even though
no such substantial effect [is] visible to the naked eye." _Id.,_ at 563.
Finally, we rejected as too attenuated the Government's argument that firearm
possession in school zones could result in violent crime which in turn could
*45 adversely affect the national economy. _Id.,_ at 563-567. The
Constitution, we said, does not tolerate reasoning that would "convert
congressional authority under the Commerce Clause to a general police power of
the sort retained by the States." _Id.,_ at 567. Later in _Morrison, supra,_
we relied on the same four considerations to hold that § 40302 of the Violence
Against Women Act of 1994, 108 Stat. 1941, 42 U. S. C. § 13981, exceeded
Congress' authority under the Commerce Clause.

In my view, the case before us is materially indistinguishable from _Lopez_
and _Morrison_ when the same considerations are taken into account.

## II

## A

What is the relevant conduct subject to Commerce Clause analysis in this case?
The Court takes its cues from Congress, applying the above considerations to
the activity regulated by the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) in general. The
Court's decision rests on two facts about the CSA: (1) Congress chose to enact
a single statute providing a comprehensive prohibition on the production,
distribution, and possession of all controlled substances, and (2) Congress
did not distinguish between various forms of intrastate noncommercial
cultivation, possession, and use of marijuana. See 21 U. S. C. §§ 841(a)(1),
844(a). Today's decision suggests that the federal regulation of local
activity is immune to Commerce Clause challenge because Congress chose to act
with an ambitious, all-encompassing statute, rather than piecemeal. In my
view, allowing Congress to set the terms of the constitutional debate in this
way, _i. e.,_ by packaging regulation of local activity in broader schemes, is
tantamount to removing meaningful limits on the Commerce Clause.

The Court's principal means of distinguishing _Lopez_ from this case is to
observe that the Gun-Free School Zones Act of 1990 was a "brief, single-
subject statute," _ante,_ at 23, *46 whereas the CSA is "a lengthy and
detailed statute creating a comprehensive framework for regulating the
production, distribution, and possession of five classes of `controlled
substances,'" _ante,_ at 24. Thus, according to the Court, it was possible in
_Lopez_ to evaluate in isolation the constitutionality of criminalizing local
activity (there gun possession in school zones), whereas the local activity
that the CSA targets (in this case cultivation and possession of marijuana for
personal medicinal use) cannot be separated from the general drug control
scheme of which it is a part.

Today's decision allows Congress to regulate intrastate activity without
check, so long as there is some implication by legislative design that
regulating intrastate activity is essential (and the Court appears to equate
"essential" with "necessary") to the interstate regulatory scheme. Seizing
upon our language in _Lopez_ that the statute prohibiting gun possession in
school zones was "not an essential part of a larger regulation of economic
activity, in which the regulatory scheme could be undercut unless the
intrastate activity were regulated," 514 U. S., at 561, the Court appears to
reason that the placement of local activity in a comprehensive scheme confirms
that it is essential to that scheme. _Ante,_ at 24-25. If the Court is right,
then _Lopez_ stands for nothing more than a drafting guide: Congress should
have described the relevant crime as "transfer or possession of a firearm
anywhere in the nation"  thus including commercial and noncommercial
activity, and clearly encompassing some activity with assuredly substantial
effect on interstate commerce. Had it done so, the majority hints, we would
have sustained its authority to regulate possession of firearms in school
zones. Furthermore, today's decision suggests we would readily sustain a
congressional decision to attach the regulation of intrastate activity to a
pre-existing comprehensive (or even not-so-comprehensive) scheme. If so, the
Court invites increased federal regulation of local activity even if, as it
suggests, Congress would not enact a _new_ interstate *47 scheme exclusively
for the sake of reaching intrastate activity, see _ante,_ at 25, n. 34;
_ante,_ at 38-39 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment).

I cannot agree that our decision in _Lopez_ contemplated such evasive or
overbroad legislative strategies with approval. Until today, such arguments
have been made only in dissent. See _Morrison,_ 529 U. S., at 657 (BREYER, J.,
dissenting) (given that Congress can regulate "`an essential part of a larger
regulation of economic activity,'" "can Congress save the present law by
including it, or much of it, in a broader `Safe Transport' or `Worker Safety'
act?"). _Lopez_ and _Morrison_ did not indicate that the constitutionality of
federal regulation depends on superficial and formalistic distinctions.
Likewise I did not understand our discussion of the role of courts in
enforcing outer limits of the Commerce Clause for the sake of maintaining the
federalist balance our Constitution requires, see _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 557;
_id.,_ at 578 (KENNEDY, J., concurring), as a signal to Congress to enact
legislation that is more extensive and more intrusive into the domain of state
power. If the Court always defers to Congress as it does today, little may be
left to the notion of enumerated powers.

The hard work for courts, then, is to identify objective markers for confining
the analysis in Commerce Clause cases. Here, respondents challenge the
constitutionality of the CSA as applied to them and those similarly situated.
I agree with the Court that we must look beyond respondents' own activities.
Otherwise, individual litigants could always exempt themselves from Commerce
Clause regulation merely by pointing to the obvious  that their personal
activities do not have a substantial effect on interstate commerce. See
_Maryland_ v. _Wirtz,_ 392 U. S. 183, 193 (1968); _Wickard,_ 317 U. S., at
127-128. The task is to identify a mode of analysis that allows Congress to
regulate more than nothing (by declining to reduce each case to its litigants)
and less than everything (by declining to let Congress set the *48 terms of
analysis). The analysis may not be the same in every case, for it depends on
the regulatory scheme at issue and the federalism concerns implicated. See
generally _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 567; _id.,_ at 579 (KENNEDY, J., concurring).

A number of objective markers are available to confine the scope of
constitutional review here. Both federal and state legislation  including the
CSA itself, the California Compassionate Use Act, and other state medical
marijuana legislation  recognize that medical and nonmedical ( _i. e.,_
recreational) uses of drugs are realistically distinct and can be segregated,
and regulate them differently. See 21 U. S. C. § 812; Cal. Health & Safety
Code Ann. § 11362.5 (West Supp. 2005); _ante,_ at 5 (opinion of the Court).
Respondents challenge only the application of the CSA to medicinal use of
marijuana. Cf. _United States_ v. _Raines,_ 362 U. S. 17, 20-22 (1960)
(describing our preference for as-applied rather than facial challenges).
Moreover, because fundamental structural concerns about dual sovereignty
animate our Commerce Clause cases, it is relevant that this case involves the
interplay of federal and state regulation in areas of criminal law and social
policy, where "States lay claim by right of history and expertise." _Lopez,
supra,_ at 583 (KENNEDY, J., concurring); see also _Morrison, supra,_ at
617-619; _Lopez, supra,_ at 580 (KENNEDY, J., concurring) ("The statute before
us upsets the federal balance to a degree that renders it an unconstitutional
assertion of the commerce power, and our intervention is required"); cf.
_Garcia,_ 469 U. S., at 586 (O'CONNOR, J., dissenting) ("[S]tate autonomy is a
relevant factor in assessing the means by which Congress exercises its powers"
under the Commerce Clause). California, like other States, has drawn on its
reserved powers to distinguish the regulation of medicinal marijuana. To
ascertain whether Congress' encroachment is constitutionally justified in this
case, then, I would focus here on the personal cultivation, possession, and
use of marijuana for medicinal purposes.

##  *49 B

Having thus defined the relevant conduct, we must determine whether, under our
precedents, the conduct is economic and, in the aggregate, substantially
affects interstate commerce. Even if intrastate cultivation and possession of
marijuana for one's own medicinal use can properly be characterized as
economic, and I question whether it can, it has not been shown that such
activity substantially affects interstate commerce. Similarly, it is neither
self-evident nor demonstrated that regulating such activity is necessary to
the interstate drug control scheme.

The Court's definition of economic activity is breathtaking. It defines as
economic any activity involving the production, distribution, and consumption
of commodities. And it appears to reason that when an interstate market for a
commodity exists, regulating the intrastate manufacture or possession of that
commodity is constitutional either because that intrastate activity is itself
economic, or because regulating it is a rational part of regulating its
market. Putting to one side the problem endemic to the Court's opinion  the
shift in focus from the activity at issue in this case to the entirety of what
the CSA regulates, see _Lopez, supra,_ at 565 ("depending on the level of
generality, any activity can be looked upon as commercial")  the Court's
definition of economic activity for purposes of Commerce Clause jurisprudence
threatens to sweep all of productive human activity into federal regulatory
reach.

The Court uses a dictionary definition of economics to skirt the real problem
of drawing a meaningful line between "what is national and what is local,"
_Jones & Laughlin Steel,_ 301 U. S., at 37. It will not do to say that
Congress may regulate noncommercial activity simply because it may have an
effect on the demand for commercial goods, or because the noncommercial
endeavor can, in some sense, substitute for commercial activity. Most
commercial goods or services have some sort of privately producible analogue.
Home care *50 substitutes for daycare. Charades games substitute for movie
tickets. Backyard or windowsill gardening substitutes for going to the
supermarket. To draw the line wherever private activity affects the demand for
market goods is to draw no line at all, and to declare everything economic. We
have already rejected the result that would follow  a federal police power.
_Lopez, supra,_ at 564.

In _Lopez_ and _Morrison,_ we suggested that economic activity usually relates
directly to commercial activity. See _Morrison,_ 529 U. S., at 611, n. 4
(intrastate activities that have been within Congress' power to regulate have
been "of an apparent commercial character"); _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 561
(distinguishing the Gun-Free School Zones Act of 1990 from "activities that
arise out of or are connected with a commercial transaction"). The homegrown
cultivation and personal possession and use of marijuana for medicinal
purposes has no apparent commercial character. Everyone agrees that the
marijuana at issue in this case was never in the stream of commerce, and
neither were the supplies for growing it. (Marijuana is highly unusual among
the substances subject to the CSA in that it can be cultivated without any
materials that have traveled in interstate commerce.) _Lopez_ makes clear that
possession is not itself commercial activity. _Ibid._ And respondents have not
come into possession by means of any commercial transaction; they have simply
grown, in their own homes, marijuana for their own use, without acquiring,
buying, selling, or bartering a thing of value. Cf. _id.,_ at 583 (KENNEDY,
J., concurring) ("The statute now before us forecloses the States from
experimenting ... and it does so by regulating an activity beyond the realm of
commerce in the ordinary and usual sense of that term").

The Court suggests that _Wickard,_ which we have identified as "perhaps the
most far reaching example of Commerce Clause authority over intrastate
activity," _Lopez, supra,_ at 560, established federal regulatory power over
any home consumption of a commodity for which a national market exists. *51 I
disagree. _Wickard_ involved a challenge to the Agricultural Adjustment Act of
1938 (AAA), which directed the Secretary of Agriculture to set national quotas
on wheat production, and penalties for excess production. 317 U. S., at
115-116. The AAA itself confirmed that Congress made an explicit choice not to
reach  and thus the Court could not possibly have approved of federal control
over  small-scale, noncommercial wheat farming. In contrast to the CSA's
limitless assertion of power, Congress provided an exemption within the AAA
for small producers. When Filburn planted the wheat at issue in _Wickard,_ the
statute exempted plantings less than 200 bushels (about six tons), and when he
harvested his wheat it exempted plantings less than six acres. _Id.,_ at 130,
n. 30. _Wickard,_ then, did not extend Commerce Clause authority to something
as modest as the home cook's herb garden. This is not to say that Congress may
never regulate small quantities of commodities possessed or produced for
personal use, or to deny that it sometimes needs to enact a zero tolerance
regime for such commodities. It is merely to say that _Wickard_ did not hold
or imply that small-scale production of commodities is always economic, and
automatically within Congress' reach.

Even assuming that economic activity is at issue in this case, the Government
has made no showing in fact that the possession and use of homegrown marijuana
for medical purposes, in California or elsewhere, has a substantial effect on
interstate commerce. Similarly, the Government has not shown that regulating
such activity is necessary to an interstate regulatory scheme. Whatever the
specific theory of "substantial effects" at issue ( _i. e.,_ whether the
activity substantially affects interstate commerce, whether its regulation is
necessary to an interstate regulatory scheme, or both), a concern for dual
sovereignty requires that Congress' excursion into the traditional domain of
States be justified.

That is why characterizing this as a case about the Necessary and Proper
Clause does not change the analysis significantly. *52 Congress must exercise
its authority under the Necessary and Proper Clause in a manner consistent
with basic constitutional principles. _Garcia,_ 469 U. S., at 585 (O'CONNOR,
J., dissenting) ("It is not enough that the `end be legitimate'; the means to
that end chosen by Congress must not contravene the spirit of the
Constitution"). As JUSTICE SCALIA recognizes, see _ante,_ at 39 (opinion
concurring in judgment), Congress cannot use its authority under the Clause to
contravene the principle of state sovereignty embodied in the Tenth Amendment.
Likewise, that authority must be used in a manner consistent with the notion
of enumerated powers  a structural principle that is as much part of the
Constitution as the Tenth Amendment's explicit textual command. Accordingly,
something more than mere assertion is required when Congress purports to have
power over local activity whose connection to an interstate market is not
self-evident. Otherwise, the Necessary and Proper Clause will always be a back
door for unconstitutional federal regulation. Cf. _Printz_ v. _United States,_
521 U. S. 898, 923 (1997) (the Necessary and Proper Clause is "the last, best
hope of those who defend ultra vires congressional action"). Indeed, if it
were enough in "substantial effects" cases for the Court to supply conceivable
justifications for intrastate regulation related to an interstate market, then
we could have surmised in _Lopez_ that guns in school zones are "never more
than an instant from the interstate market" in guns already subject to
extensive federal regulation, _ante,_ at 40 (SCALIA, J., concurring in
judgment), recast _Lopez_ as a Necessary and Proper Clause case, and thereby
upheld the Gun-Free School Zones Act of 1990. (According to the Court's and
the concurrence's logic, for example, the _Lopez_ court should have reasoned
that the prohibition on gun possession in school zones could be an appropriate
means of effectuating a related prohibition on "sell[ing]" or "deliver[ing]"
firearms or ammunition to "any individual who the licensee knows or has
reasonable cause to believe is less than *53 eighteen years of age." 18 U. S.
C. § 922(b)(1) (1988 ed., Supp. II).)

There is simply no evidence that homegrown medicinal marijuana users
constitute, in the aggregate, a sizable enough class to have a discernable,
let alone substantial, impact on the national illicit drug market  or
otherwise to threaten the CSA regime. Explicit evidence is helpful when
substantial effect is not "visible to the naked eye." See _Lopez,_ 514 U. S.,
at 563. And here, in part because common sense suggests that medical marijuana
users may be limited in number and that California's Compassionate Use Act and
similar state legislation may well isolate activities relating to medicinal
marijuana from the illicit market, the effect of those activities on
interstate drug traffic is not self-evidently substantial.

In this regard, again, this case is readily distinguishable from _Wickard._ To
decide whether the Secretary could regulate local wheat farming, the Court
looked to "the actual effects of the activity in question upon interstate
commerce." 317 U. S., at 120. Critically, the Court was able to consider
"actual effects" because the parties had "stipulated a summary of the
economics of the wheat industry." _Id.,_ at 125. After reviewing in detail the
picture of the industry provided in that summary, the Court explained that
consumption of homegrown wheat was the most variable factor in the size of the
national wheat crop, and that on-site consumption could have the effect of
varying the amount of wheat sent to market by as much as 20 percent. _Id.,_ at
127. With real numbers at hand, the _Wickard_ Court could easily conclude that
"a factor of such volume and variability as home-consumed wheat would have a
substantial influence on price and market conditions" nationwide. _Id.,_ at
128; see also _id.,_ at 128-129 ("This record leaves us in no doubt" about
substantial effects).

The Court recognizes that "the record in the _Wickard_ case itself established
the causal connection between the production *54 for local use and the
national market" and argues that "we have before us findings by Congress _to
the same effect._ " _Ante,_ at 20 (emphasis added). The Court refers to a
series of declarations in the introduction to the CSA saying that (1) local
distribution and possession of controlled substances causes "swelling" in
interstate traffic; (2) local production and distribution cannot be
distinguished from interstate production and distribution; (3) federal control
over intrastate incidents "is essential to the effective control" over
interstate drug trafficking. 21 U. S. C. §§ 801(1)-(6). These bare
declarations cannot be compared to the record before the Court in _Wickard._

They amount to nothing more than a legislative insistence that the regulation
of controlled substances must be absolute. They are asserted without any
supporting evidence  descriptive, statistical, or otherwise. "[S]imply
because Congress may conclude that a particular activity substantially affects
interstate commerce does not necessarily make it so." _Hodel_ v. _Virginia
Surface Mining & Reclamation Assn., Inc.,_ 452 U. S. 264, 311 (1981)
(REHNQUIST, J., concurring in judgment). Indeed, if declarations like these
suffice to justify federal regulation, and if the Court today is right about
what passes rationality review before us, then our decision in _Morrison_
should have come out the other way. In that case, Congress had supplied
numerous findings regarding the impact gender-motivated violence had on the
national economy. 529 U. S., at 614; _id.,_ at 628-636 (SOUTER, J.,
dissenting) (chronicling findings). But, recognizing that "`"[w]hether
particular operations affect interstate commerce sufficiently to come under
the constitutional power of Congress to regulate them is ultimately a judicial
rather than a legislative question,"'" we found Congress' detailed findings
inadequate. _Id.,_ at 614 (quoting _Lopez, supra,_ at 557, n. 2, in turn
quoting _Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc._ v. _United States,_ 379 U. S. 241, 273
(1964) (Black, J., concurring)). If, as the Court claims, today's decision
does not *55 break with precedent, how can it be that voluminous findings,
documenting extensive hearings about the specific topic of violence against
women, did not pass constitutional muster in _Morrison,_ while the CSA's
abstract, unsubstantiated, generalized findings about controlled substances
do?

In particular, the CSA's introductory declarations are too vague and
unspecific to demonstrate that the federal statutory scheme will be undermined
if Congress cannot exert power over individuals like respondents. The
declarations are not even specific to marijuana. (Facts about substantial
effects may be developed in litigation to compensate for the inadequacy of
Congress' findings; in part because this case comes to us from the grant of a
preliminary injunction, there has been no such development.) Because here
California, like other States, has carved out a limited class of activity for
distinct regulation, the inadequacy of the CSA's findings is especially
glaring. The California Compassionate Use Act exempts from other state drug
laws patients and their caregivers "who posses[s] or cultivat[e] marijuana for
the _personal_ medical purposes of the patient upon the written or oral
recommendation or approval of a physician" to treat a list of serious medical
conditions. Cal. Health & Safety Code Ann. §§ 11362.5(d), 11362.7(h) (West
Supp. 2005) (emphasis added). Compare _ibid._ with, _e. g.,_ § 11357(b) (West
1991) (criminalizing marijuana possession in excess of 28.5 grams); § 11358
(criminalizing marijuana cultivation). The Act specifies that it should not be
construed to supersede legislation prohibiting persons from engaging in acts
dangerous to others, or to condone the diversion of marijuana for nonmedical
purposes. § 11362.5(b)(2) (West Supp. 2005). To promote the Act's operation
and to facilitate law enforcement, California recently enacted an
identification card system for qualified patients. §§ 11362.7-11362.83. We
generally assume States enforce their laws, see _Riley_ v. _National
Federation of Blind of N. C., Inc.,_ 487 U. S. 781, 795 (1988), and have no
reason to think otherwise here.

*56 The Government has not overcome empirical doubt that the number of Californians engaged in personal cultivation, possession, and use of medical marijuana, or the amount of marijuana they produce, is enough to threaten the federal regime. Nor has it shown that Compassionate Use Act marijuana users have been or are realistically likely to be responsible for the drug's seeping into the market in a significant way. The Government does cite one estimate that there were over 100,000 Compassionate Use Act users in California in 2004, Reply Brief for Petitioners 16, but does not explain, in terms of proportions, what their presence means for the national illicit drug market. See generally _Wirtz,_ 392 U. S., at 196, n. 27 (Congress cannot use "a relatively trivial impact on commerce as an excuse for broad general regulation of state or private activities"); cf. General Accounting Office, Marijuana: Early Experiences with Four States' Laws That Allow Use for Medical Purposes 21-23 (Rep. No. 03-189, Nov. 2002), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/ d03189.pdf (as visited June 3, 2005, and available in Clerk of Court's case file) (in four California counties before the identification card system was enacted, voluntarily registered medical marijuana patients were less than 0.5 percent of the population; in Alaska, Hawaii, and Oregon, statewide medical marijuana registrants represented less than 0.05 percent of the States' populations). It also provides anecdotal evidence about the CSA's enforcement. See Reply Brief for Petitioners 17-18. The Court also offers some arguments about the effect of the Compassionate Use Act on the national market. It says that the California statute might be vulnerable to exploitation by unscrupulous physicians, that Compassionate Use Act patients may overproduce, and that the history of the narcotics trade shows the difficulty of cordoning off any drug use from the rest of the market. These arguments are plausible; if borne out in fact they could justify prosecuting Compassionate Use Act patients under the federal CSA. But, without substantiation, *57 they add little to the CSA's conclusory statements about diversion, essentiality, and market effect. Piling assertion upon assertion does not, in my view, satisfy the substantiality test of _Lopez_ and _Morrison._

## III

We would do well to recall how James Madison, the father of the Constitution,
described our system of joint sovereignty to the people of New York: "The
powers delegated by the proposed Constitution to the federal government are
few and defined. Those which are to remain in the State governments are
numerous and indefinite.... The powers reserved to the several States will
extend to all the objects which, in the ordinary course of affairs, concern
the lives, liberties, and properties of the people, and the internal order,
improvement, and prosperity of the State." The Federalist No. 45, pp. 292-293
(C. Rossiter ed. 1961).

Relying on Congress' abstract assertions, the Court has endorsed making it a
federal crime to grow small amounts of marijuana in one's own home for one's
own medicinal use. This overreaching stifles an express choice by some States,
concerned for the lives and liberties of their people, to regulate medical
marijuana differently. If I were a California citizen, I would not have voted
for the medical marijuana ballot initiative; if I were a California legislator
I would not have supported the Compassionate Use Act. But whatever the wisdom
of California's experiment with medical marijuana, the federalism principles
that have driven our Commerce Clause cases require that room for experiment be
protected in this case. For these reasons I dissent.

JUSTICE THOMAS, dissenting.

Respondents Diane Monson and Angel Raich use marijuana that has never been
bought or sold, that has never crossed state lines, and that has had no
demonstrable effect on the national market for marijuana. If Congress can
regulate *58 this under the Commerce Clause, then it can regulate virtually
anything  and the Federal Government is no longer one of limited and
enumerated powers.

## I

Respondents' local cultivation and consumption of marijuana is not "Commerce
... among the several States." U. S. Const., Art. I, § 8, cl. 3. By holding
that Congress may regulate activity that is neither interstate nor commerce
under the Interstate Commerce Clause, the Court abandons any attempt to
enforce the Constitution's limits on federal power. The majority supports this
conclusion by invoking, without explanation, the Necessary and Proper Clause.
Regulating respondents' conduct, however, is not "necessary and proper for
carrying into Execution" Congress' restrictions on the interstate drug trade.
Art. I, § 8, cl. 18. Thus, neither the Commerce Clause nor the Necessary and
Proper Clause grants Congress the power to regulate respondents' conduct.

## A

As I explained at length in _United States_ v. _Lopez,_ 514 U. S. 549 (1995),
the Commerce Clause empowers Congress to regulate the buying and selling of
goods and services trafficked across state lines. _Id.,_ at 586-589
(concurring opinion). The Clause's text, structure, and history all indicate
that, at the time of the founding, the term "`commerce' consisted of selling,
buying, and bartering, as well as transporting for these purposes." _Id.,_ at
585 (THOMAS, J., concurring). Commerce, or trade, stood in contrast to
productive activities like manufacturing and agriculture. _Id.,_ at 586-587
(THOMAS, J., concurring). Throughout founding-era dictionaries, Madison's
notes from the Constitutional Convention, The Federalist Papers, and the
ratification debates, the term "commerce" is consistently used to mean trade
or exchange  not all economic or gainful activity that has some attenuated
connection to trade or exchange. _Ibid._ (THOMAS, *59 J., concurring);
Barnett, The Original Meaning of the Commerce Clause, 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 101,
112-125 (2001). The term "commerce" commonly meant trade or exchange (and
shipping for these purposes) not simply to those involved in the drafting and
ratification processes, but also to the general public. Barnett, New Evidence
of the Original Meaning of the Commerce Clause, 55 Ark. L. Rev. 847, 857-862
(2003).

Even the majority does not argue that respondents' conduct is itself "Commerce
among the several States," Art. I, § 8, cl. 3. _Ante,_ at 22. Monson and Raich
neither buy nor sell the marijuana that they consume. They cultivate their
cannabis entirely in the State of California  it never crosses state lines,
much less as part of a commercial transaction. Certainly no evidence from the
founding suggests that "commerce" included the mere possession of a good or
some purely personal activity that did not involve trade or exchange for
value. In the early days of the Republic, it would have been unthinkable that
Congress could prohibit the local cultivation, possession, and consumption of
marijuana.

On this traditional understanding of "commerce," the Controlled Substances Act
(CSA), 21 U. S. C. § 801 _et seq.,_ regulates a great deal of marijuana
trafficking that is interstate and commercial in character. The CSA does not,
however, criminalize only the interstate buying and selling of marijuana.
Instead, it bans the entire market  intrastate or interstate, noncommercial
or commercial  for marijuana. Respondents are correct that the CSA exceeds
Congress' commerce power as applied to their conduct, which is purely
intrastate and noncommercial.

## B

More difficult, however, is whether the CSA is a valid exercise of Congress'
power to enact laws that are "necessary and proper for carrying into
Execution" its power to regulate interstate commerce. Art. I, § 8, cl. 18. The
Necessary *60 and Proper Clause is not a warrant to Congress to enact any law
that bears some conceivable connection to the exercise of an enumerated
power.[1] Nor is it, however, a command to Congress to enact only laws that
are absolutely indispensable to the exercise of an enumerated power.[2]

In _McCulloch_ v. _Maryland,_ 4 Wheat. 316 (1819), this Court, speaking
through Chief Justice Marshall, set forth a test for determining when an Act
of Congress is permissible under the Necessary and Proper Clause:

> "Let the end be legitimate, let it be within the scope of the constitution,
> and all means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end,
> which are not prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the
> constitution, are constitutional." _Id.,_ at 421.

To act under the Necessary and Proper Clause, then, Congress must select a
means that is "appropriate" and "plainly adapted" to executing an enumerated
power; the means cannot be otherwise "prohibited" by the Constitution; and the
means cannot be inconsistent with "the letter and spirit of the
[C]onstitution." _Ibid.;_ D. Currie, The Constitution in the Supreme Court:
The First Hundred Years 1789-1888, pp. 163-164 (1985). The CSA, as applied to
respondents' conduct, is not a valid exercise of Congress' power under the
Necessary and Proper Clause.

## 1

Congress has exercised its power over interstate commerce to criminalize
trafficking in marijuana across state *61 lines. The Government contends that
banning Monson and Raich's intrastate drug activity is "necessary and proper
for carrying into Execution" its regulation of interstate drug trafficking.
Art. I, § 8, cl. 18. See 21 U. S. C. § 801(6). However, in order to be
"necessary," the intrastate ban must be more than "a reasonable means [of]
effectuat[ing] the regulation of interstate commerce." Brief for Petitioners
14; see _ante,_ at 22 (majority opinion) (employing rational-basis review). It
must be "plainly adapted" to regulating interstate marijuana trafficking  in
other words, there must be an "obvious, simple, and direct relation" between
the intrastate ban and the regulation of interstate commerce. _Sabri_ v.
_United States,_ 541 U. S. 600, 613 (2004) (THOMAS, J., concurring in
judgment); see also _United States_ v. _Dewitt,_ 9 Wall. 41, 44 (1870)
(finding ban on intrastate sale of lighting oils not "appropriate and plainly
adapted means for carrying into execution" Congress' taxing power).

On its face, a ban on the intrastate cultivation, possession, and distribution
of marijuana may be plainly adapted to stopping the interstate flow of
marijuana. Unregulated local growers and users could swell both the supply and
the demand sides of the interstate marijuana market, making the market more
difficult to regulate. _Ante,_ at 12-13, 22 (majority opinion). But
respondents do not challenge the CSA on its face. Instead, they challenge it
as applied to their conduct. The question is thus whether the intrastate ban
is "necessary and proper" as applied to medical marijuana users like
respondents.[3]

Respondents are not regulable simply because they belong to a large class
(local growers and users of marijuana) that *62 Congress might need to reach,
if they also belong to a distinct and separable subclass (local growers and
users of state-authorized, medical marijuana) that does not undermine the
CSA's interstate ban. _Ante,_ at 47-48 (O'CONNOR, J., dissenting). The Court
of Appeals found that respondents' "limited use is clearly distinct from the
broader illicit drug market," because "th[eir] medicinal marijuana . . . is
not intended for, nor does it enter, the stream of commerce." _Raich_ v.
_Ashcroft,_ 352 F. 3d 1222, 1228 (CA9 2003). If that is generally true of
individuals who grow and use marijuana for medical purposes under state law,
then even assuming Congress has "obvious" and "plain" reasons why regulating
intrastate cultivation and possession is necessary to regulating the
interstate drug trade, none of those reasons applies to medical marijuana
patients like Monson and Raich.

California's Compassionate Use Act sets respondents' conduct apart from other
intrastate producers and users of marijuana. The Act channels marijuana use to
"seriously ill Californians," Cal. Health & Safety Code Ann. §
11362.5(b)(1)(A) (West Supp. 2005), and prohibits "the diversion of marijuana
for nonmedical purposes," § 11362.5(b)(2).[4] California strictly controls the
cultivation and possession of marijuana for medical purposes. To be eligible
for its program, California requires that a patient have an illness that
cannabis can relieve, such as cancer, AIDS, or arthritis, § 11362.5(b)(1)(A),
and that he obtain a physician's recommendation or approval, § 11362.5(d).
Qualified patients must provide personal and medical information to obtain
medical identification cards, and there is a statewide registry of
cardholders. §§ 11362.XXX-XXXXX.76. Moreover, the Medical Board of California
has issued guidelines for physicians' cannabis recommendations, and it
sanctions physicians who do not comply with the guidelines. *63 See, _e. g.,_
_People_ v. _Spark,_ 121 Cal. App. 4th 259, 263, 16 Cal. Rptr. 3d 840, 843
(2004).

This class of intrastate users is therefore distinguishable from others. We
normally presume that States enforce their own laws, _Riley_ v. _National
Federation of Blind of N. C., Inc.,_ 487 U.S. 781, 795 (1988), and there is no
reason to depart from that presumption here: Nothing suggests that
California's controls are ineffective. The scant evidence that exists suggests
that few people  the vast majority of whom are aged 40 or older  register to
use medical marijuana. General Accounting Office, Marijuana: Early Experiences
with Four States' Laws That Allow Use for Medical Purposes 22-23 (Rep. No.
03-189, Nov. 2002), http://www. gao.gov/new.items/d03189.pdf (all Internet
materials as visited June 3, 2005, and available in Clerk of Court's case
file). In part because of the low incidence of medical marijuana use, many law
enforcement officials report that the introduction of medical marijuana laws
has not affected their law enforcement efforts. _Id.,_ at 32.

These controls belie the Government's assertion that placing medical marijuana
outside the CSA's reach "would prevent effective enforcement of the interstate
ban on drug trafficking." Brief for Petitioners 33. Enforcement of the CSA can
continue as it did prior to the Compassionate Use Act. Only now, a qualified
patient could avoid arrest or prosecution by presenting his identification
card to law enforcement officers. In the event that a qualified patient is
arrested for possession or his cannabis is seized, he could seek to prove as
an affirmative defense that, in conformity with state law, he possessed or
cultivated small quantities of marijuana intrastate solely for personal
medical use. _People_ v. _Mower,_ 28 Cal. 4th 457, 469-470, 49 P. 3d 1067,
1073-1075 (2002); _People_ v. _Trippet,_ 56 Cal. App. 4th 1532, 1549, 66 Cal.
Rptr. 2d 559, 560 (1997). Moreover, under the CSA, certain drugs that present
a high risk of abuse and addiction but that nevertheless have an accepted
medical use  drugs like morphine *64 and amphetamines  are available by
prescription. 21 U. S. C. §§ 812(b)(2)(A)-(B); 21 CFR § 1308.12 (2004). No one
argues that permitting use of these drugs under medical supervision has
undermined the CSA's restrictions.

But even assuming that States' controls allow some seepage of medical
marijuana into the illicit drug market, there is a multibillion-dollar
interstate market for marijuana. Executive Office of the President, Office of
Nat. Drug Control Policy, Marijuana Fact Sheet 5 (Feb. 2004), http://www.
whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/publications/factsht/marijuana/ index.html. It is
difficult to see how this vast market could be affected by diverted medical
cannabis, let alone in a way that makes regulating intrastate medical
marijuana obviously essential to controlling the interstate drug market.

To be sure, Congress declared that state policy would disrupt federal law
enforcement. It believed the across-the-board ban essential to policing
interstate drug trafficking. 21 U.S.C. § 801(6). But as JUSTICE O'CONNOR
points out, Congress presented no evidence in support of its conclusions,
which are not so much findings of fact as assertions of power. _Ante,_ at
53-55 (dissenting opinion). Congress cannot define the scope of its own power
merely by declaring the necessity of its enactments.

In sum, neither in enacting the CSA nor in defending its application to
respondents has the Government offered any obvious reason why banning medical
marijuana use is necessary to stem the tide of interstate drug trafficking.
Congress' goal of curtailing the interstate drug trade would not plainly be
thwarted if it could not apply the CSA to patients like Monson and Raich. That
is, unless Congress' aim is really to exercise police power of the sort
reserved to the States in order to eliminate even the intrastate possession
and use of marijuana.

## 2

Even assuming the CSA's ban on locally cultivated and consumed marijuana is
"necessary," that does not mean it is *65 also "proper." The means selected by
Congress to regulate interstate commerce cannot be "prohibited" by, or
inconsistent with the "letter and spirit" of, the Constitution. _McCulloch,_ 4
Wheat., at 421.

In _Lopez,_ I argued that allowing Congress to regulate intrastate,
noncommercial activity under the Commerce Clause would confer on Congress a
general "police power" over the Nation. 514 U.S., at 584, 600 (concurring
opinion). This is no less the case if Congress ties its power to the Necessary
and Proper Clause rather than the Commerce Clause. When agents from the Drug
Enforcement Administration raided Monson's home, they seized six cannabis
plants. If the Federal Government can regulate growing a half-dozen cannabis
plants for personal consumption (not because it is interstate commerce, but
because it is inextricably bound up with interstate commerce), then Congress'
Article I powers  as expanded by the Necessary and Proper Clause  have no
meaningful limits. Whether Congress aims at the possession of drugs, guns, or
any number of other items, it may continue to "appropriat[e] state police
powers under the guise of regulating commerce." _United States_ v. _Morrison,_
529 U. S. 598, 627 (2000) (THOMAS, J., concurring).

Even if Congress may regulate purely intrastate activity when essential to
exercising some enumerated power, see _Dewitt,_ 9 Wall., at 44; but see
Barnett, The Original Meaning of the Necessary and Proper Clause, 6 U. Pa. J.
Const. L. 183, 186 (2003) (detailing statements by Founders that the Necessary
and Proper Clause was not intended to expand the scope of Congress' enumerated
powers), Congress may not use its incidental authority to subvert basic
principles of federalism and dual sovereignty. _Printz_ v. _United States,_
521 U. S. 898, 923-924 (1997); _Alden_ v. _Maine,_ 527 U. S. 706, 732-733
(1999); _Garcia_ v. _San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority,_ 469 U. S.
528, 585 (1985) (O'CONNOR, J., dissenting); The Federalist No. 33, pp. 204-205
(J. Cooke ed. 1961) (A. Hamilton) (hereinafter The Federalist).

*66 Here, Congress has encroached on States' traditional police powers to define the criminal law and to protect the health, safety, and welfare of their citizens.[5] _Brecht_ v. _Abrahamson,_ 507 U. S. 619, 635 (1993); _Hillsborough County_ v. _Automated Medical Laboratories, Inc.,_ 471 U. S. 707, 719 (1985). Further, the Government's rationale  that it may regulate the production or possession of any commodity for which there is an interstate market  threatens to remove the remaining vestiges of States' traditional police powers. See Brief for Petitioners 21-22; cf. Ehrlich, The Increasing Federalization of Crime, 32 Ariz. St. L. J. 825, 826, 841 (2000) (describing both the relative recency of a large percentage of federal crimes and the lack of a relationship between some of these crimes and interstate commerce). This would convert the Necessary and Proper Clause into precisely what Chief Justice Marshall did not envision, a "pretext . . . for the accomplishment of objects not intrusted to the government." _McCulloch, supra,_ at 423.

##  *67 II

The majority advances three reasons why the CSA is a legitimate exercise of
Congress' authority under the Commerce Clause: First, respondents' conduct,
taken in the aggregate, may substantially affect interstate commerce, _ante,_
at 22; second, regulation of respondents' conduct is essential to regulating
the interstate marijuana market, _ante,_ at 24-25; and, third, regulation of
respondents' conduct is incidental to regulating the interstate marijuana
market, _ante,_ at 22. JUSTICE O'CONNOR explains why the majority's reasons
cannot be reconciled with our recent Commerce Clause jurisprudence. The
majority's justifications, however, suffer from even more fundamental flaws.

## A

The majority holds that Congress may regulate intrastate cultivation and
possession of medical marijuana under the Commerce Clause, because such
conduct arguably has a substantial effect on interstate commerce. The
majority's decision is further proof that the "substantial effects" test is a
"rootless and malleable standard" at odds with the constitutional design.
_Morrison, supra,_ at 627 (THOMAS, J., concurring).

The majority's treatment of the substantial effects test is rootless, because
it is not tethered to either the Commerce Clause or the Necessary and Proper
Clause. Under the Commerce Clause, Congress may regulate interstate commerce,
not activities that substantially affect interstate commerce, any more than
activities that do not fall within, but that affect, the subjects of its other
Article I powers. _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 589 (THOMAS, J., concurring).
Whatever additional latitude the Necessary and Proper Clause affords, _supra,_
at 65-66, the question is whether Congress' legislation is essential to the
regulation of interstate commerce itself  not whether the legislation extends
only to economic *68 activities that substantially affect interstate commerce.
_Supra,_ at 60-61; _ante,_ at 37 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment).

The majority's treatment of the substantial effects test is malleable, because
the majority expands the relevant conduct. By defining the class at a high
level of generality (as the intrastate manufacture and possession of
marijuana), the majority overlooks that individuals authorized by state law to
manufacture and possess medical marijuana exert no demonstrable effect on the
interstate drug market. _Supra,_ at 64. The majority ignores that whether a
particular activity substantially affects interstate commerce  and thus comes
within Congress' reach on the majority's approach  can turn on a number of
objective factors, like state action or features of the regulated activity
itself. _Ante,_ at 47-48 (O'CONNOR, J., dissenting). For instance, here, if
California and other States are effectively regulating medical marijuana
users, then these users have little effect on the interstate drug trade.[6]

The substantial effects test is easily manipulated for another reason. This
Court has never held that Congress can *69 regulate noneconomic activity that
substantially affects interstate commerce. _Morrison,_ 529 U. S., at 613
("[T]hus far in our Nation's history our cases have upheld Commerce Clause
regulation of intrastate activity only where that activity is _economic_ in
nature" (emphasis added)); _Lopez, supra,_ at 560. To evade even that modest
restriction on federal power, the majority defines economic activity in the
broadest possible terms as the "`the production, distribution, and consumption
of commodities.'"[7] _Ante,_ at 25 (quoting Webster's Third New International
Dictionary 720 (1966) (hereinafter Webster's 3d)). This carves out a vast
swath of activities that are subject to federal regulation. See _ante,_ at
49-50 (O'CONNOR, J., dissenting). If the majority is to be taken seriously,
the Federal Government may now regulate quilting bees, clothes drives, and
potluck suppers throughout the 50 States. This makes a mockery of Madison's
assurance to the people of New York that the "powers delegated" to the Federal
Government are "few and defined," while those of the States are "numerous and
indefinite." The Federalist No. 45, at 313 (J. Madison).

Moreover, even a Court interested more in the modern than the original
understanding of the Constitution ought to resolve cases based on the meaning
of words that are actually in the document. Congress is authorized to regulate
"Commerce," and respondents' conduct does not qualify under any definition of
that term.[8] The majority's opinion *70 only illustrates the steady drift
away from the text of the Commerce Clause. There is an inexorable expansion
from "`[c]ommerce,'" _ante,_ at 5, to "commercial" and "economic" activity,
_ante,_ at 23, and finally to all "production, distribution, and consumption"
of goods or services for which there is an "established . . . interstate
market," _ante,_ at 26. Federal power expands, but never contracts, with each
new locution. The majority is not interpreting the Commerce Clause, but
rewriting it.

The majority's rewriting of the Commerce Clause seems to be rooted in the
belief that, unless the Commerce Clause covers the entire web of human
activity, Congress will be left powerless to regulate the national economy
effectively. _Ante,_ at 18-19; _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 573-574 (KENNEDY, J.,
concurring). The interconnectedness of economic activity is not a modern
phenomenon unfamiliar to the Framers. _Id.,_ at 590-593 (THOMAS, J.,
concurring); Letter from J. Madison to S. Roane (Sept. 2, 1819), in 3 The
Founders' Constitution 259-260 (P. Kurland & R. Lerner eds. 1987). Moreover,
the Framers understood what the majority does not appear to fully appreciate:
There is a danger to concentrating too much, as well as too little, power in
the Federal Government. This Court has carefully avoided stripping Congress of
its ability to regulate _inter_ state commerce, but it has casually allowed
the Federal Government to strip States of their ability to regulate _intra_
state commerce  not to mention a host of local activities, like mere drug
possession, that are not commercial.

One searches the Court's opinion in vain for any hint of what aspect of
American life is reserved to the States. Yet this Court knows that "`[t]he
Constitution created a Federal Government of limited powers.'" _New York_ v.
_United States,_ 505 U. S. 144, 155 (1992) (quoting _Gregory_ v. _Ashcroft,_
*71 501 U. S. 452, 457 (1991)). That is why today's decision will add no
measure of stability to our Commerce Clause jurisprudence: This Court is
willing neither to enforce limits on federal power, nor to declare the Tenth
Amendment a dead letter. If stability is possible, it is only by discarding
the stand-alone substantial effects test and revisiting our definition of
"Commerce . . . among the several States." Congress may regulate interstate
commerce  not things that affect it, even when summed together, unless truly
"necessary and proper" to regulating interstate commerce.

## B

The majority also inconsistently contends that regulating respondents' conduct
is both incidental and essential to a comprehensive legislative scheme.
_Ante,_ at 22, 24-25. I have already explained why the CSA's ban on local
activity is not essential. _Supra,_ at 64. However, the majority further
claims that, because the CSA covers a great deal of interstate commerce, it
"is of no moment" if it also "ensnares some purely intrastate activity."
_Ante,_ at 22. So long as Congress casts its net broadly over an interstate
market, according to the majority, it is free to regulate interstate and
intrastate activity alike. This cannot be justified under either the Commerce
Clause or the Necessary and Proper Clause. If the activity is purely
intrastate, then it may not be regulated under the Commerce Clause. And if the
regulation of the intrastate activity is purely incidental, then it may not be
regulated under the Necessary and Proper Clause.

Nevertheless, the majority terms this the "pivotal' distinction between the
present case and _Lopez_ and _Morrison. Ante,_ at 23. In _Lopez_ and
_Morrison,_ the parties asserted facial challenges, claiming "that a
particular statute or provision fell outside Congress' commerce power in its
entirety." _Ante,_ at 23. Here, by contrast, respondents claim only that the
CSA falls outside Congress' commerce power as applied *72 to their individual
conduct. According to the majority, while courts may set aside whole statutes
or provisions, they may not "excise individual applications of a concededly
valid statutory scheme." _Ante,_ at 23; see also _Perez_ v. _United States,_
402 U. S. 146, 154 (1971); _Maryland_ v. _Wirtz,_ 392 U. S. 183, 192-193
(1968).

It is true that if respondents' conduct is part of a "class of activities . .
. and that class is within the reach of federal power," _Perez, supra,_ at 154
(emphases deleted), then respondents may not point to the _de minimis_ effect
of their own personal conduct on the interstate drug market, _Wirtz, supra,_
at 196, n. 27. _Ante,_ at 47 (O'CONNOR, J., dissenting). But that begs the
question at issue: whether respondents' "class of activities" is "within the
reach of federal power," which depends in turn on whether the class is defined
at a low or a high level of generality. _Supra,_ at 61-62. If medical
marijuana patients like Monson and Raich largely stand outside the interstate
drug market, then courts must excise them from the CSA's coverage. Congress
expressly provided that if "a provision [of the CSA] is held invalid in one of
more of its _applications,_ the provision shall remain in effect in all its
valid applications that are severable." 21 U. S. C. § 901 (emphasis added);
see also _United States_ v. _Booker,_ 543 U. S. 220, 320-321, and n. 9 (2005)
(THOMAS, J., dissenting in part).

Even in the absence of an express severability provision, it is implausible
that this Court could set aside entire portions of the United States Code as
outside Congress' power in _Lopez_ and _Morrison,_ but it cannot engage in the
more restrained practice of invalidating particular applications of the CSA
that are beyond Congress' power. This Court has regularly entertained as-
applied challenges under constitutional provisions, see _United States_ v.
_Raines,_ 362 U. S. 17, 20-21 (1960), including the Commerce Clause, see
_Katzenbach_ v. _McClung,_ 379 U. S. 294, 295 (1964); _Heart of Atlanta_ *73
_Motel, Inc._ v. _United States,_ 379 U. S. 241, 249 (1964); _Wickard_ v.
_Filburn,_ 317 U. S. 111, 113-114 (1942). There is no reason why, when
Congress exceeds the scope of its commerce power, courts may not invalidate
Congress' overreaching on a case-by-case basis. The CSA undoubtedly regulates
a great deal of interstate commerce, but that is no license to regulate
conduct that is neither interstate nor commercial, however minor or
incidental.

If the majority is correct that _Lopez_ and _Morrison_ are distinct because
they were facial challenges to "particular statute[s] or provision[s],"
_ante,_ at 23, then congressional power turns on the manner in which Congress
packages legislation. Under the majority's reasoning, Congress could not enact
 either as a single-subject statute or as a separate provision in the CSA  a
prohibition on the intrastate possession or cultivation of marijuana. Nor
could it enact an intrastate ban simply to supplement existing drug
regulations. However, that same prohibition is perfectly constitutional when
integrated into a piece of legislation that reaches other regulable conduct.
_Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 600-601 (THOMAS, J., concurring).

Finally, the majority's view  that because _some_ of the CSA's applications
are constitutional, they must _all_ be constitutional  undermines its
reliance on the substantial effects test. The intrastate conduct swept within
a general regulatory scheme may or may not have a substantial effect on the
relevant interstate market. "[O]ne _always_ can draw the circle broadly enough
to cover an activity that, when taken in isolation, would not have substantial
effects on commerce." _Id.,_ at 600 (THOMAS, J., concurring). The breadth of
legislation that Congress enacts says nothing about whether the intrastate
activity substantially affects interstate commerce, let alone whether it is
necessary to the scheme. Because medical marijuana users in California and
elsewhere are not placing substantial amounts of cannabis *74 into the stream
of interstate commerce, Congress may not regulate them under the substantial
effects test, no matter how broadly it drafts the CSA.

## * * *

The majority prevents States like California from devising drug policies that
they have concluded provide much-needed respite to the seriously ill. It does
so without any serious inquiry into the necessity for federal regulation or
the propriety of "displac[ing] state regulation in areas of traditional state
concern," _id.,_ at 583 (KENNEDY, J., concurring). The majority's rush to
embrace federal power "is especially unfortunate given the importance of
showing respect for the sovereign States that comprise our Federal Union."
_United States_ v. _Oakland Cannabis Buyers' Cooperative,_ 532 U. S. 483, 502
(2001) (STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment). Our federalist system, properly
understood, allows California and a growing number of other States to decide
for themselves how to safeguard the health and welfare of their citizens. I
would affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals. I respectfully dissent.

## NOTES

[*] Briefs of _amici curiae_ urging reversal were filed for the Community
Rights Counsel by _Timothy J. Dowling;_ for the Drug Free America Foundation,
Inc., et al. by _David G. Evans;_ for Robert L. DuPont, M. D., et al. by _John
R. Bartels, Jr.;_ and for U. S. Representative Mark E. Souder et al. by
_Nicholas P. Coleman._

Briefs of _amici curiae_ urging affirmance were filed for the State of Alabama
et al. by _Troy King,_ Attorney General of Alabama, _Kevin C. Newsom,_
Solicitor General, _Charles C. Foti, Jr.,_ Attorney General of Louisiana, and
_Jim Hood,_ Attorney General of Mississippi; for the State of California et
al. by _Bill Lockyer,_ Attorney General of California, _Richard M. Frank,_
Chief Deputy Attorney General, _Manuel M. Medeiros,_ State Solicitor, _Taylor
S. Carey,_ Special Assistant Attorney General, _J. Joseph Curran, Jr.,_
Attorney General of Maryland, and _Christine O. Gregoire,_ Attorney General of
Washington; for the California Nurses Association et al. by _Julia M.
Carpenter;_ for the Cato Institute by _Douglas W. Kmiec, Timothy Lynch,_ and
_Robert A. Levy;_ for Constitutional Law Scholars by _Ernest A. Young, Matthew
D. Schnall, Charles Fried,_ and _David L. Shapiro;_ for the Institute for
Justice by _William H. Mellor, Dana Berliner,_ and _Richard A. Epstein;_ for
the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society et al. by _David T. Goldberg, Sean H.
Donahue,_ and _Daniel N. Abrahamson;_ for the Lymphoma Foundation of America
et al. by _Stephen C. Willey;_ for the Marijuana Policy Project et al. by
_Cheryl Flax-Davidson;_ and for the National Organization for the Reform of
Marijuana Laws et al. by _John Wesley Hall, Jr., Joshua L. Dratel,_ and
_Sheryl Gordon McCloud._

Briefs of _amici curiae_ were filed for the Pacific Legal Foundation by _M.
Reed Hopper, Sharon L. Browne,_ and _Deborah J. La Fetra;_ and for the Reason
Foundation by _Manuel S. Klausner._

[1] See Alaska Stat. §§ 11.71.090, 17.37.010-17.37.080 (Lexis 2004); Colo.
Const., Art. XVIII, § 14, Colo. Rev. Stat. § 18-18-406.3 (Lexis 2004); Haw.
Rev. Stat. §§ 329-121 to 329-128 (2004 Cum. Supp.); Me. Rev. Stat. Ann., Tit.
22, § 2383-B(5) (West 2004); Nev. Const., Art. 4, § 38, Nev. Rev. Stat. §§
453A.010-453A.810 (2003); Ore. Rev. Stat. §§ 475.300-475.346 (2003); Vt. Stat.
Ann., Tit. 18, §§ 4472-4474d (Supp. 2004); Wash. Rev. Code §§
69.51.010-69.51.080 (2004); see also Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 13-3412.01 (West
Supp. 2004) (voter initiative permitting physicians to prescribe Schedule I
substances for medical purposes that was purportedly repealed in 1997, but the
repeal was rejected by voters in 1998). In November 2004, Montana voters
approved Initiative 148, adding to the number of States authorizing the use of
marijuana for medical purposes.

[2] 1913 Cal. Stats. ch. 342, § 8 _a;_ see also Gieringer, The Origins of
Cannabis Prohibition in California 21-23 (rev. Mar. 2005), available at
http:// www.canorml.org/background/caloriginsmjproh.pdf (all Internet
materials as visited June 2, 2005, and available in Clerk of Court's case
file).

[3] Cal. Health & Safety Code Ann. § 11362.5 (West Supp. 2005). The California
Legislature recently enacted additional legislation supplementing the
Compassionate Use Act. §§ 11362.7-11362.9.

[4] "The people of the State of California hereby find and declare that the
purposes of the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 are as follows:

"(A) To ensure that seriously ill Californians have the right to obtain and
use marijuana for medical purposes where that medical use is deemed
appropriate and has been recommended by a physician who has determined that
the person's health would benefit from the use of marijuana in the treatment
of cancer, anorexia, AIDS, chronic pain, spasticity, glaucoma, arthritis,
migraine, or any other illness for which marijuana provides relief.

"(B) To ensure that patients and their primary caregivers who obtain and use
marijuana for medical purposes upon the recommendation of a physician are not
subject to criminal prosecution or sanction.

"(C) To encourage the federal and state governments to implement a plan to
provide for the safe and affordable distribution of marijuana to all patients
in medical need of marijuana." § 11362.5(b)(1).

[5] "Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no physician in this state
shall be punished, or denied any right or privilege, for having recommended
marijuana to a patient for medical purposes." § 11362.5(c).

[6] "Section 11357, relating to the possession of marijuana, and Section
11358, relating to the cultivation of marijuana, shall not apply to a patient,
or to a patient's primary caregiver, who possesses or cultivates marijuana for
the personal medical purposes of the patient upon the written or oral
recommendation or approval of a physician." § 11362.5(d).

[7] § 11362.5(e).

[8] On remand, the District Court entered a preliminary injunction enjoining
petitioners "`from arresting or prosecuting Plaintiffs Angel McClary Raich and
Diane Monson, seizing their medical cannabis, forfeiting their property, or
seeking civil or administrative sanctions against them with respect to the
intrastate, non-commercial cultivation, possession, use, and obtaining without
charge of cannabis for personal medical purposes on the advice of a physician
and in accordance with state law, and which is not used for distribution,
sale, or exchange.'" Brief for Petitioners 9.

[9] See D. Musto & P. Korsmeyer, The Quest for Drug Control 60 (2002)
(hereinafter Musto & Korsmeyer).

[10] H. R. Rep. No. 91-1444, pt. 2, p. 22 (1970) (hereinafter H. R. Rep.); 26
Congressional Quarterly Almanac 531 (1970) (hereinafter Almanac); Musto &
Korsmeyer 56-57.

[11] Pure Food and Drugs Act of 1906, ch. 3915, 34 Stat. 768, repealed by Act
of June 25, 1938, ch. 675, § 902(a), 52 Stat. 1059.

[12] See _United States_ v. _Doremus,_ 249 U. S. 86 (1919); _Leary_ v. _United
States,_ 395 U. S. 6, 14-16 (1969).

[13] See _Doremus,_ 249 U. S., at 90-93.

[14] R. Bonnie & C. Whitebread, The Marijuana Conviction 154-174 (1999); L.
Grinspoon & J. Bakalar, Marihuana, the Forbidden Medicine 7-3 (rev. ed. 1997)
(hereinafter Grinspoon & Bakalar). Although this was the Federal Government's
first attempt to regulate the marijuana trade, by this time all States had in
place some form of legislation regulating the sale, use, or possession of
marijuana. R. Isralowitz, Drug Use, Policy, and Management 134 (2d ed. 2002).

[15] _Leary,_ 395 U. S., at 14-16.

[16] Grinspoon & Bakalar 8.

[17] _Leary,_ 395 U. S., at 16-18.

[18] Musto & Korsmeyer 32-35; 26 Almanac 533. In 1973, the Bureau of Narcotics
and Dangerous Drugs became the DEA. See Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1973, § 1, 28 CFR
§ 0.100 (1973).

[19] The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 consists
of three titles. Title I relates to the prevention and treatment of narcotic
addicts through HEW (now the Department of Health and Human Services). 84
Stat. 1238. Title II, as discussed in more detail above, addresses drug
control and enforcement as administered by the Attorney General and the DEA.
_Id.,_ at 1242. Title III concerns the import and export of controlled
substances. _Id.,_ at 1285.

[20] In particular, Congress made the following findings:

"(1) Many of the drugs included within this subchapter have a useful and
legitimate medical purpose and are necessary to maintain the health and
general welfare of the American people.

"(2) The illegal importation, manufacture, distribution, and possession and
improper use of controlled substances have a substantial and detrimental
effect on the health and general welfare of the American people.

"(3) A major portion of the traffic in controlled substances flows through
interstate and foreign commerce. Incidents of the traffic which are not an
integral part of the interstate or foreign flow, such as manufacture, local
distribution, and possession, nonetheless have a substantial and direct effect
upon interstate commerce because 

"(A) after manufacture, many controlled substances are transported in
interstate commerce,

"(B) controlled substances distributed locally usually have been transported
in interstate commerce immediately before their distribution, and

"(C) controlled substances possessed commonly flow through interstate commerce
immediately prior to such possession.

"(4) Local distribution and possession of controlled substances contribute to
swelling the interstate traffic in such substances.

"(5) Controlled substances manufactured and distributed intrastate cannot be
differentiated from controlled substances manufactured and distributed
interstate. Thus, it is not feasible to distinguish, in terms of controls,
between controlled substances manufactured and distributed interstate and
controlled substances manufactured and distributed intrastate.

"(6) Federal control of the intrastate incidents of the traffic in controlled
substances is essential to the effective control of the interstate incidents
of such traffic." 21 U. S. C. §§ 801(1)-(6).

[21] See _United States_ v. _Moore,_ 423 U. S. 122, 135 (1975); see also H. R.
Rep., at 22.

[22] _Id.,_ at 61 (quoting letter from Roger O. Egeberg, M. D., to Hon. Harley
O. Staggers (Aug. 14, 1970)).

[23] Starting in 1972, the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana
Laws began its campaign to reclassify marijuana. Grinspoon & Bakalar 13-17.
After some fleeting success in 1988 when an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ)
declared that the DEA would be acting in an "unreasonable, arbitrary, and
capricious" manner if it continued to deny marijuana access to seriously ill
patients, and concluded that it should be reclassified as a Schedule III
substance, _Grinspoon_ v. _DEA,_ 828 F.2d 881, 883-884 (CA1 1987), the
campaign has proved unsuccessful. The DEA Administrator did not endorse the
ALJ's findings, 54 Fed. Reg. 53767 (1989), and since that time has routinely
denied petitions to reschedule the drug, most recently in 2001. 66 Fed. Reg.
20038 (2001). The Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit has
reviewed the petition to reschedule marijuana on five separate occasions over
the course of 30 years, ultimately upholding the Administrator's final order.
See _Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics_ v. _DEA,_ 15 F. 3d 1131, 1133 (1994).

[24] _United States_ v. _Lopez,_ 514 U. S. 549, 552-558 (1995); _id.,_ at
568-574 (KENNEDY, J., concurring); _id.,_ at 604-607 (SOUTER, J., dissenting).

[25] See _Gibbons_ v. _Ogden,_ 9 Wheat. 1, 224 (1824) (opinion of Johnson,
J.); Stern, That Commerce Which Concerns More States Than One, 47 Harv. L.
Rev. 1335, 1337, 1340-1341 (1934); G. Gunther, Constitutional Law 127 (9th ed.
1975).

[26] See _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 553-554; _id.,_ at 568-569 (KENNEDY, J.,
concurring); see also _Granholm_ v. _Heald,_ 544 U. S. 460, 472-473 (2005).

[27] _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 554; see also _Wickard_ v. _Filburn,_ 317 U. S.
111, 121 (1942) ("It was not until 1887, with the enactment of the Interstate
Commerce Act, that the interstate commerce power began to exert positive
influence in American law and life. This first important federal resort to the
commerce power was followed in 1890 by the Sherman Anti-Trust Act and,
thereafter, mainly after 1903, by many others. These statutes ushered in new
phases of adjudication, which required the Court to approach the
interpretation of the Commerce Clause in the light of an actual exercise by
Congress of its power thereunder" (footnotes omitted)).

[28] Even respondents acknowledge the existence of an illicit market in
marijuana; indeed, Raich has personally participated in that market, and
Monson expresses a willingness to do so in the future. App. 59, 74, 87. See
also _Department of Revenue of Mont._ v. _Kurth Ranch,_ 511 U. S. 767, 770,
774, n. 12, and 780, n. 17 (1994) (discussing the "market value" of
marijuana); _id.,_ at 790 (REHNQUIST, C. J., dissenting); _id.,_ at 792
(O'CONNOR, J., dissenting); _Whalen_ v. _Roe,_ 429 U. S. 589, 591 (1977)
(addressing prescription drugs "for which there is both a lawful and an
unlawful market"); _Turner_ v. _United States,_ 396 U. S. 398, 417, n. 33
(1970) (referring to the purchase of drugs on the "retail market").

[29] To be sure, the wheat market is a lawful market that Congress sought to
protect and stabilize, whereas the marijuana market is an unlawful market that
Congress sought to eradicate. This difference, however, is of no
constitutional import. It has long been settled that Congress' power to
regulate commerce includes the power to prohibit commerce in a particular
commodity. _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 571 (KENNEDY, J., concurring) ("In the
_Lottery Case,_ 188 U. S. 321 (1903), the Court rejected the argument that
Congress lacked [the] power to prohibit the interstate movement of lottery
tickets because it had power only to regulate, not to prohibit"); see also
_Wickard,_ 317 U. S., at 128 ("The stimulation of commerce is a use of the
regulatory function quite as definitely as prohibitions or restrictions
thereon").

[30] See _id.,_ at 125 (recognizing that Filburn's activity "may not be
regarded as commerce").

[31] The Executive Office of the President has estimated that in 2000 American
users spent $10.5 _billion_ on the purchase of marijuana. Office of Nat. Drug
Control Policy, Marijuana Fact Sheet 5 (Feb. 2004),
http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/publications/factsht/marijuana/index.html.

[32] Moreover, as discussed in more detail above, Congress did make findings
regarding the effects of intrastate drug activity on interstate commerce. See
n. 20, _supra._ Indeed, even the Court of Appeals found that those findings
"weigh[ed] in favor" of upholding the constitutionality of the CSA. 352 F.3d
1222, 1232 (CA9 2003) (case below). The dissenters, however, would impose a
new and heightened burden on Congress (unless the litigants can garner
evidence sufficient to cure Congress' perceived "inadequa[cies]")that
legislation must contain detailed findings proving that each activity
regulated within a comprehensive statute is essential to the statutory scheme.
_Post,_ at 53-55 (opinion of O'CONNOR, J.); _post,_ at 64 (opinion of THOMAS,
J.). Such an exacting requirement is not only unprecedented, it is also
impractical. Indeed, the principal dissent's critique of Congress for "not
even" including "declarations" specific to marijuana is particularly
unpersuasive given that the CSA initially identified 80 other substances
subject to regulation as Schedule I drugs, not to mention those categorized in
Schedules II-V. _Post,_ at 55 (opinion of O'CONNOR, J.). Surely, Congress
cannot be expected (and certainly should not be required) to include specific
findings on each and every substance contained therein in order to satisfy the
dissenters' unfounded skepticism.

[33] See n. 21, _supra_ (citing sources that evince Congress' particular
concern with the diversion of drugs from legitimate to illicit channels).

[34] The principal dissent asserts that by "[s]eizing upon our language in
_Lopez,_ " _post,_ at 46 (opinion of O'CONNOR, J.), _i. e.,_ giving effect to
our well-established case law, Congress will now have an incentive to
legislate broadly. Even putting aside the political checks that would
generally curb Congress' power to enact a broad and comprehensive scheme for
the purpose of targeting purely local activity, there is no suggestion that
the CSA constitutes the type of "evasive" legislation the dissent fears, nor
could such an argument plausibly be made. _Post,_ at 47 (O'CONNOR, J.,
dissenting).

[35] _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 560; see also _id.,_ at 573-574 (KENNEDY, J.,
concurring) (stating that _Lopez_ did not alter our "practical conception of
commercial regulation" and that Congress may "regulate in the commercial
sphere on the assumption that we have a single market and a unified purpose to
build a stable national economy").

[36] See 16 U. S. C. § 668(a) (bald and golden eagles); 18 U. S. C. § 175(a)
(biological weapons); § 831(a) (nuclear material); § 842(n)(1) (certain
plastic explosives); § 2342(a) (contraband cigarettes).

[37] We acknowledge that evidence proffered by respondents in this case
regarding the effective medical uses for marijuana, if found credible after
trial, would cast serious doubt on the accuracy of the findings that require
marijuana to be listed in Schedule I. See, _e. g.,_ Institute of Medicine,
Marijuana and Medicine: Assessing the Science Base 179 (J. Joy, S. Watson, &
J. Benson eds. 1999) (recognizing that "[s]cientific data indicate the
potential therapeutic value of cannabinoid drugs, primarily THC
[Tetrahydrocannabinol] for pain relief, control of nausea and vomiting, and
appetite stimulation"); see also _Conant_ v. _Walters,_ 309 F. 3d 629, 640-643
(CA9 2002) (Kozinski, J., concurring) (chronicling medical studies recognizing
valid medical uses for marijuana and its derivatives). But the possibility
that the drug may be reclassified in the future has no relevance to the
question whether Congress now has the power to regulate its production and
distribution. Respondents' submission, if accepted, would place all homegrown
medical substances beyond the reach of Congress' regulatory jurisdiction.

[38] That is so even if California's current controls (enacted eight years
after the Compassionate Use Act was passed) are "effective," as the dissenters
would have us blindly presume, _post,_ at 53-54 (opinion of O'CONNOR, J.);
_post,_ at 63, 68 (opinion of THOMAS, J.). California's decision (made 34
years after the CSA was enacted) to impose "stric[t] controls" on the
"cultivation and possession of marijuana for medical purposes," _post,_ at 62
(THOMAS, J., dissenting), cannot retroactively divest Congress of its
authority under the Commerce Clause. Indeed, JUSTICE THOMAS' urgings to the
contrary would turn the Supremacy Clause on its head, and would resurrect
limits on congressional power that have long since been rejected. See _post,_
at 41 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment) (quoting _Mc-Culloch_ v.
_Maryland,_ 4 Wheat. 316, 424 (1819)) ("`To impose on [Congress] the necessity
of resorting to means which it cannot control, which another government may
furnish or withhold, would render its course precarious, the result of its
measures uncertain, and create a dependence on other governments, which might
disappoint its most important designs, and is incompatible with the language
of the constitution'").

Moreover, in addition to casting aside more than a century of this Court's
Commerce Clause jurisprudence, it is noteworthy that JUSTICE THOMAS'
suggestion that States possess the power to dictate the extent of Congress'
commerce power would have far-reaching implications beyond the facts of this
case. For example, under his reasoning, Congress would be equally powerless to
regulate, let alone prohibit, the intrastate possession, cultivation, and use
of marijuana for _recreational_ purposes, an activity which all States
"strictly contro[l]." Indeed, his rationale seemingly would require Congress
to cede its constitutional power to regulate commerce whenever a State opts to
exercise its "traditional police powers to define the criminal law and to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of their citizens." _Post,_ at 66
(dissenting opinion).

[39] California's Compassionate Use Act has since been amended, limiting the
catchall category to "[a]ny other chronic or persistent medical symptom that
either: ... [s]ubstantially limits the ability of the person to conduct one or
more major life activities as defined" in the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990, or "[i]f not alleviated, may cause serious harm to the patient's
safety or physical or mental health." Cal. Health & Safety Code Ann. §§
11362.7(h)(12)(A)-(B) (West Supp. 2005).

[40] See, _e. g.,_ _United States_ v. _Moore,_ 423 U. S. 122 (1975); _United
States_ v. _Doremus,_ 249 U. S. 86 (1919).

[41] The state policy allows patients to possess up to eight ounces of dried
marijuana, and to cultivate up to 6 mature or 12 immature plants. Cal. Health
& Safety Code Ann. § 11362.77(a) (West Supp. 2005). However, the quantity
limitations serve only as a floor. Based on a doctor's recommendation, a
patient can possess whatever quantity is necessary to satisfy his medical
needs, and cities and counties are given _carte blanche_ to establish more
generous limits. Indeed, several cities and counties have done just that. For
example, patients residing in the cities of Oakland and Santa Cruz and in the
counties of Sonoma and Tehama are permitted to possess up to 3 pounds of
processed marijuana. Reply Brief for Petitioners 18-19 (citing Proposition 215
Enforcement Guidelines). Putting that quantity in perspective, 3 pounds of
marijuana yields roughly 3,000 joints or cigarettes. Executive Office of the
President, Office of National Drug Control Policy, What America's Users Spend
on Illegal Drugs 24 (Dec. 2001),
http://www.whitehousedrugpolicy.gov/publications/pdf/american_
users_spend_2002.pdf. And the street price for that amount can range anywhere
from $900 to $24,000. DEA, Illegal Drug Price and Purity Report (Apr. 2003)
(DEA-02058).

[42] For example, respondent Raich attests that she uses 2.5 ounces of
cannabis a week. App. 82. Yet as a resident of Oakland, she is entitled to
possess up to 3 pounds of processed marijuana at any given time, nearly 20
times more than she uses on a weekly basis.

[43] See, _e. g.,_ _People ex rel. Lungren_ v. _Peron,_ 59 Cal. App. 4th 1383,
1386-1387, 70 Cal. Rptr. 2d 20, 23 (1997) (recounting how a Cannabis Buyers'
Club engaged in an "indiscriminate and uncontrolled pattern of sale to
thousands of persons among the general public, including persons who had not
demonstrated any recommendation or approval of a physician and, in fact, some
of whom were not under the care of a physician, such as undercover officers,"
and noting that "some persons who had purchased marijuana on respondents'
premises were reselling it unlawfully on the street").

[1] See also _Garcia_ v. _San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority,_ 469 U.
S. 528, 584-585 (1985) (O'CONNOR, J., dissenting) (explaining that it is
through the Necessary and Proper Clause that "an intrastate activity
`affecting' interstate commerce can be reached through the commerce power").

[2] _Wickard_ v. _Filburn,_ 317 U. S. 111 (1942), presented such a case.
Because the unregulated production of wheat for personal consumption
diminished demand in the regulated wheat market, the Court said, it carried
with it the potential to disrupt Congress's price regulation by driving down
prices in the market. _Id.,_ at 127-129. This potential disruption of
Congress's interstate regulation, and not only the effect that personal
consumption of wheat had on interstate commerce, justified Congress's
regulation of that conduct. _Id.,_ at 128-129.

[3] The principal dissent claims that, if this is sufficient to sustain the
regulation at issue in this case, then it should also have been sufficient to
sustain the regulation at issue in _United States_ v. _Lopez,_ 514 U. S. 549
(1995). See _post,_ at 52 (arguing that "we could have surmised in _Lopez_
that guns in school zones are `never more than an instant from the interstate
market' in guns already subject to extensive federal regulation, recast
_Lopez_ as a Necessary and Proper Clause case, and thereby upheld the Gun-Free
School Zones Act" (citation omitted)). This claim founders upon the shoals of
_Lopez_ itself, which made clear that the statute there at issue was " _not_
an essential part of a larger regulation of economic activity." _Lopez,
supra,_ at 561 (emphasis added). On the dissent's view of things, that
statement is inexplicable. Of course it is in addition difficult to imagine
what intelligible scheme of regulation of the interstate market in guns could
have as an appropriate means of effectuation the prohibition of guns within
1,000 feet of schools (and nowhere else). The dissent points to a federal law,
18 U. S. C. § 922(b)(1), barring licensed dealers from selling guns to minors,
see _post,_ at 52-53, but the relationship between the regulatory scheme of
which § 922(b)(1) is a part (requiring all dealers in firearms that have
traveled in interstate commerce to be licensed, see § 922(a)) and the statute
at issue in _Lopez_ approaches the nonexistent  which is doubtless why the
Government did not attempt to justify the statute on the basis of that
relationship.

[1] _McCulloch_ v. _Maryland,_ 4 Wheat. 316, 419-421 (1819); Madison, The Bank
Bill, House of Representatives (Feb. 2, 1791), in 3 The Founders' Constitution
244 (P. Kurland & R. Lerner eds. 1987) (requiring "direct" rather than
"remote" means-end fit); Hamilton, Opinion on the Constitutionality of the
Bank (Feb. 23, 1791), in _id.,_ at 248, 250 (requiring "obvious" means-end
fit, where the end was "clearly comprehended within any of the specified
powers" of Congress).

[2] _McCulloch, supra,_ at 413-415; D. Currie, The Constitution in the Supreme
Court: The First Hundred Years 1789-1888, p. 162 (1985).

[3] Because respondents do not challenge on its face the CSA's ban on
marijuana, 21 U. S. C. §§ 841(a)(1), 844(a), our adjudication of their as-
applied challenge casts no doubt on this Court's practice in _United States_
v. _Lopez,_ 514 U. S. 549 (1995), and _United States_ v. _Morrison,_ 529 U S.
598 (2000). In those cases, we held that Congress, in enacting the statutes at
issue, had exceeded its Article I powers.

[4] Other States likewise prohibit diversion of marijuana for nonmedical
purposes. See, _e. g.,_ Colo. Const., Art. XVIII, § 14(2)(d); Nev. Rev. Stat.
§§ 453A.300(1)(e)-(f) (2003); Ore. Rev. Stat. §§ 475.316(1)(c)-(d) (2003).

[5] In fact, the Anti-Federalists objected that the Necessary and Proper
Clause would allow Congress, _inter alia,_ to " _constitute new Crimes,_ . . .
and extend [its] Power as far as [it] shall think proper; so that the State
Legislatures have no Security for the Powers now presumed to remain to them;
or the People for their Rights." Mason, Objections to the Constitution Formed
by the Convention (1787), in 2 The Complete Anti-Federalist 11, 12-13 (H.
Storing ed. 1981) (emphasis added). Hamilton responded that these objections
were gross "misrepresentation[s]." The Federalist No. 33, at 204. He termed
the Clause "perfectly harmless," for it merely confirmed Congress' implied
authority to enact laws in exercising its enumerated powers. _Id.,_ at 205;
see also _Lopez,_ 514 U. S., at 597, n. 6 (THOMAS, J., concurring) (discussing
Congress' limited ability to establish nationwide criminal prohibitions);
_Cohens_ v. _Virginia,_ 6 Wheat. 264, 426-428 (1821) (finding it "clear, that
Congress cannot punish felonies generally," except in areas over which it
possesses plenary power). According to Hamilton, the Clause was needed only
"to guard against cavilling refinements" by those seeking to cripple federal
power. The Federalist No. 33, at 205; _id.,_ No. 44, at 303-304 (J. Madison).

[6] Remarkably, the majority goes so far as to declare this question
irrelevant. It asserts that the CSA is constitutional even if California's
current controls are effective, because state action can neither expand nor
contract Congress' powers. _Ante,_ at 29-30, n. 38. The majority's assertion
is misleading. Regardless of state action, Congress has the power to regulate
intrastate economic activities that substantially affect interstate commerce
(on the majority's view) or activities that are necessary and proper to
effectuating its commerce power (on my view). But on either approach, whether
an intrastate activity falls within the scope of Congress' powers turns on
factors that the majority is unwilling to confront. The majority apparently
believes that even if States prevented any medical marijuana from entering the
illicit drug market, and thus even if there were no need for the CSA to govern
medical marijuana users, we should uphold the CSA under the _Commerce_ Clause
and the _Necessary_ and Proper Clause. Finally, to invoke the Supremacy
Clause, as the majority does, _ante,_ at 29, n. 38, is to beg the question.
The CSA displaces California's Compassionate Use Act if the CSA is
constitutional as applied to respondents' conduct, but that is the very
question at issue.

[7] Other dictionaries do not define the term "economic" as broadly as the
majority does. See, _e. g.,_ The American Heritage Dictionary of the English
Language 583 (3d ed. 1992) (defining "economic" as "[o]f or relating to the
production, development, and management of _material wealth,_ as of a country,
household, or business enterprise" (emphasis added)). The majority does not
explain why it selects a remarkably expansive 40-year-old definition.

[8] See, _e. g., id.,_ at 380 ("[t]he buying and selling of goods, especially
on a large scale, as between cities or nations"); The Random House Dictionary
of the English Language 411 (2d ed. 1987) ("an interchange of goods or
commodities, esp. on a large scale between different countries . . . or
between different parts of the same country"); Webster's 3d 456 ("the exchange
or buying and selling of commodities esp. on a large scale and involving
transportation from place to place").

