247 U.S. 251

38 S.Ct. 529

62 L.Ed. 1101

HAMMER, U. S. Atty.,  
v.  
DAGENHART et al.

No. 704.

Argued April 15 and 16, 1918.

Decided June 3, 1918.

[Syllabus intentionally omitted]

_Mr. Solicitor General Davis,_ of Washington, D. C., _Mr. W. L. Frierson,
Asst. Atty. Gen.,_ and _Mr. Robert Szold,_ of Chicago, Ill., for appellant.

[Argument of Counsel from pages 253-259 intentionally omitted]

_Messrs. Morgan J. O'Brien,_ of New York City, _W. M. Hendren_ and _Clement
Manly,_ both of Winston-Salem, N. C., _W. P. Bynum,_ of Greensboro, N. C., and
_Junius Parker,_ of New York City, for appellees.

[Argument of Counsel from pages 260-267 intentionally omitted]

Mr. Justice DAY delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

A bill was filed in the United States District Court for the Western District
of North Carolina by a father in his own behalf and as next friend of his two
minor sons, one under the age of fourteen years and the other between the ages
of fourteen and sixteen years, employes in a cotton mill at Charlotte, North
Carolina, to enjoin the enforcement of the act of Congress intended to prevent
interstate commerce in the products of child labor. Act Sept. 1, 1916, 39
Stat. 675, c. 432 (Comp. St. 1916, §§ 8819a-8816f).

2

The District Court held the act unconstitutional and entered a decree
enjoining its enforcement. This appeal brings the case here. The first section
of the act is in the margin.1

3

Other sections of the act contain provisions for its enforcement and prescribe
penalties for its violation.

4

The attack upon the act rests upon three propositions: First: It is not a
regulation of interstate and foreign commerce; second: It contravenes the
Tenth Amendment to the Constitution; third: It conflicts with the Fifth
Amendment to the Constitution.

5

The controlling question for decision is: Is it within the authority of
Congress in regulating commerce among the states to prohibit the
transportation in interstate commerce of manufactured goods, the product of a
factory in which, within thirty days prior to their removal therefrom,
children under the age of fourteen have been employed or permitted to work, or
children between the ages of fourteen and sixteen years have been employed or
permitted to work more than eight hours in any day, or more than six days in
any week, or after the hour of 7 o'clock p. m., or before the hour of 6
o'clock a. m.?

6

The power essential to the passage of this act, the government contends, is
found in the commerce clause of the Constitution which authorizes Congress to
regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the states.

7

In Gibbons v. Ogdon, 9 Wheat. 1, 6 L. Ed. 23, Chief Justice Marshall, speaking
for this court, and defining the extent and nature of the commerce power,
said, 'It is the power to regulate; that is, to prescribe the rule by which
commerce is to be governed.' In other words, the power is one to control the
means by which commerce is carried on, which is directly the contrary of the
assumed right to forbid commerce from moving and thus destroying it as to
particular commodities. But it is insisted that adjudged cases in this court
establish the doctrine that the power to regulate given to Congress
incidentally includes the authority to prohibit the movement of ordinary
commodities and therefore that the subject is not open for discussion. The
cases demonstrate the contrary. They rest upon the character of the particular
subjects dealt with and the fact that the scope of governmental authority,
state or national, possessed over them is such that the authority to prohibit
is as to them but the exertion of the power to regulate.

8

The first of these cases is Champion v. Ames, 188 U. S. 321, 23 Sup. Ct. 321,
47 L. Ed. 492, the so-called Lottery Case, in which it was held that Congress
might pass a law having the effect to keep the channels of commerce free from
use in the transportation of tickets used in the promotion of lottery schemes.
In Hipolite Egg Co. v. United States, 220 U. S. 45, 31 Sup. Ct. 364, 55 L. Ed.
364, this court sustained the power of Congress to pass the Pure Food and Drug
Act (Act June 30, 1906, c. 3915, 34 Stat. 768 [Comp. St. 1916, §§ 8717-8728]),
which prohibited the introduction into the states by means of interstate
commerce of impure foods and drugs. In Hoke v. United States, 227 U. S. 308,
33 Sup. Ct. 281, 57 L. Ed. 523, 43 L. R. A. (N. S.) 906, Ann. Cas. 1913E, 905,
this court sustained the constitutionality of the so-called 'White Slave
Traffic Act' (Act June 25, 1910, c. 395, 36 Stat. 825 [Comp. St. 1916, §§
8812-8819]), whereby the transportation of a woman in interstate commerce for
the purpose of prostitution was forbidden. In that case we said, having
reference to the authority of Congress, under the regulatory power, to protect
the channels of interstate commerce:

9

'If the facility of interstate transportation can be taken away from the
demoralization of lotteries, the debasement of obscene literature, the
contagion of diseased cattle or persons, the impurity of food and drugs, the
like facility can be taken away from the systematic enticement to, and the
enslavement in prostitution and debauchery of women, and, more insistently, of
girls.' In Caminetti v. United States, 242 U. S. 470, 37 Sup. Ct. 1 2, 61 L.
Ed. 442, L. R. A. 1917F, 502, Ann. Cas. 1917B, 1168, we held that Congress
might prohibit the transportation of women in interstate commerce for the
purposes of debauchery and kindred purposes. In Clark Distilling Co. v.
Western Maryland Railway Co., 242 U. S. 311, 37 Sup. Ct. 180, 61 L. Ed. 326,
L. R. A. 1917B, 1218, Ann. Cas. 1917B, 845, the power of Congress over the
transportation of intoxicating liquors was sustained. In the course of the
opinion it was said:

10

'The power conferred is to regulate, and the very terms of the grant would
seem to repel the contention that only prohibition of movement in interstate
commerce was embraced. And the cogency of this is manifest, since if the
doctrine were applied to those manifold and important subjects of interstate
commerce as to which Congress from the beginning has regulated, not
prohibited, the existence of government under the Constitution would be no
longer possible.'

11

And concluding the discussion which sustained the authority of the Government
to prohibit the transportation of liquor in interstate commerce, the court
said:

12

'* * * The exceptional nature of the subject here regulated is the basis upon
which the exceptional power exerted must rest and affords no ground for any
fear that such power may be constitutionally extended to things which it may
not, consistently with the guaranties of the Constitution embrace.'

13

In each of these instances the use of interstate transportation was necessary
to the accomplishment of harmful results. In other words, although the power
over interstate transportation was to regulate, that could only be
accomplished by prohibiting the use of the facilities of interstate commerce
to effect the evil intended.

14

This element is wanting in the present case. The thing intended to be
accomplished by this statute is the denial of the facilities of interstate
commerce to those manufacturers in the states who employ children within the
prohibited ages. The act in its effect does not regulate transportation among
the states, but aims to standardize the ages at which children may be employed
in mining and manufacturing within the states. The goods shipped are of
themselves harmless. The act permits them to be freely shipped after thirty
days from the time of their removal from the factory. When offered for
shipment, and before transportation begins, the labor of their production is
over, and the mere fact that they were intended for interstate commerce
transportation does not make their production subject to federal control under
the commerce power.

15

Commerce 'consists of intercourse and traffic * * * and includes the
transportation of persons and property, as well as the purchase, sale and
exchange of commodities.' The making of goods and the mining of coal are not
commerce, nor does the fact that these things are to be afterwards shipped, or
used in interstate commerce, make their production a part thereof. Delaware,
Lackawanna & Western R. R. Co. v. Yurkonis, 238 U. S. 439, 35 Sup. Ct. 902, 59
L. Ed. 1397.

16

Over interstate transportation, or its incidents, the regulatory power of
Congress is ample, but the production of articles, intended for interstate
commerce, is a matter of local regulation. 'When the commerce begins is
determined, not by the character of the commodity, nor by the intention of the
owner to transfer it to another state for sale, nor by his preparation of it
for transportation, but by its actual delivery to a common carrier for
transportation, or the actual commencement of its transfer to another state.'
Mr. Justice Jackson in Re Greene (C. C.) 52 Fed. 113. This principle has been
recognized often in this court. Coe v. Errol, 116 U. S. 517, 6 Sup. Ct. 475,
29 L. Ed. 715; Bacon v. Illinois, 227 U. S. 504, 33 Sup. Ct. 299, 57 L. Ed.
615, and cases cited. If it were otherwise, all manufacture intended for
interstate shipment would be brought under federal control to the practical
exclusion of the authority of the states, a result certainly not contemplated
by the framers of the Constitution when they vested in Congress the authority
to regulate commerce among the States. Kidd v. Pearson, 128 U. S. 1, 21, 9
Sup. Ct. 6, 32 L. Ed. 346.

17

It is further contended that the authority of Congress may be exerted to
control interstate commerce in the shipment of childmade goods because of the
effect of the circulation of such goods in other states where the evil of this
class of labor has been recognized by local legislation, and the right to thus
employ child labor has been more rigorously restrained than in the state of
production. In other words, that the unfair competition, thus engendered, may
be controlled by closing the channels of interstate commerce to manufacturers
in those states where the local laws do not meet what Congress deems to be the
more just standard of other states.

18

There is no power vested in Congress to require the states to exercise their
police power so as to prevent possible unfair competition. Many causes may co-
operate to give one state, by reason of local laws or conditions, an economic
advantage over others. The commerce clause was not intended to give to
Congress a general authority to equalize such conditions. In some of the
states laws have been passed fixing minimum wages for women, in others the
local law regulates the hours of labor of women in various employments.
Business done in such states may be at an economic disadvantage when compared
with states which have no such regulations; surely, this fact does not give
Congress the power to deny transportation in interstate commerce to those who
carry on business where the hours of labor and the rate of compensation for
women have not been fixed by a standard in use in other states and approved by
Congress.

19

The grant of power of Congress over the subject of interstate commerce was to
enable it to regulate such commerce, and not to give it authority to control
the states in their exercise of the police power over local trade and
manufacture.

20

The grant of authority over a purely federal matter was not intended to
destroy the local power always existing and carefully reserved to the states
in the Tenth Amendment to the Constitution.

21

Police regulations relating to the internal trade and affairs of the states
have been uniformly recognized as within such control. 'This,' said this court
in United States v. Dewitt, 9 Wall. 41, 45, 19 L. Ed. 593, 'has been so
frequently declared by this court, results so obviously from the terms of the
Constitution, and has been so fully explained and supported on former
occasions, that we think it unnecessary to enter again upon the discussion.'
See Keller v. United States, 213 U. S. 138, 144, 145, 146, 29 Sup. Ct. 470, 53
L. Ed. 737, 16 Ann. Cas. 1066; Cooley's Constitutional Limitations (7th Ed.)
p. 11.

22

In the judgment which established the broad power of Congress over interstate
commerce, Chief Justice Marshall said (9 Wheat. 203, 6 L.Ed. 23):

23

'They [inspection laws] act upon the subject, before it becomes an article of
foreign commerce, or of commerce among the states, and prepare it for that
purpose. They form a portion of that immense mass of legislation, which
embraces everything within the territory of a state, not surrendered to the
general government; all of which can be most advantageously exercised by the
states themselves. Inspection laws, quarantine laws, health laws of every
description, as well as laws for regulating the internal commerce of a state,
and those which respect turnpike roads, ferries, etc., are component parts of
this mass.'

24

And in Dartmouth College v. Woodward, 4 Wheat. 518, 4 L. Ed. 629, the same
great judge said:

25

'That the framers of the Constitution did not intend to restrain the states in
the regulation of their civil institutions, adopted for internal government,
and that the instrument they have given us is not to be so construed may be
admitted.'

26

That there should be limitations upon the right to employ children in mines
and factories in t e interest of their own and the public welfare, all will
admit. That such employment is generally deemed to require regulation is shown
by the fact that the brief of counsel states that every state in the Union has
a law upon the subject, limiting the right to thus employ children. In North
Carolina, the state wherein is located the factory in which the employment was
had in the present case, no child under twelve years of age is permitted to
work.

27

It may be desirable that such laws be uniform, but our federal government is
one of enumerated powers; 'this principle,' declared Chief Justice Marshall in
McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 4 L. Ed. 579, 'is universally admitted.'

28

A statute must be judged by its natural and reasonable effect. Collins v. New
Hampshire, 171 U. S. 30, 33, 34, 18 Sup. Ct. 768, 43 L. Ed. 60. The control by
Congress over interstate commerce cannot authorize the exercise of authority
not entrusted to it by the Constitution. Pipe Line Case, 234 U. S. 548, 560,
34 Sup. Ct. 956, 58 L. Ed. 1459. The maintenance of the authority of the
states over matters purely local is as essential to the preservation of our
institutions as is the conservation of the supremacy of the federal power in
all matters entrusted to the nation by the federal Constitution.

29

In interpreting the Constitution it must never be forgotten that the nation is
made up of states to which are entrusted the powers of local government. And
to them and to the people the powers not expressly delegated to the national
government are reserved. Lane County v. Oregon, 7 Wall. 71, 76, 19 L. Ed. 101.
The power of the states to regulate their purely internal affairs by such laws
as seem wise to the local authority is inherent and has never been surrendered
to the general government. New York v. Miln, 11 Pet. 102, 139, 9 L. Ed. 648;
Slaughter House Cases, 16 Wall. 36, 63, 21 L. Ed. 394; Kidd v. Pearson, supra.
To sustain this statute would not be in our judgment a recognition of the
lawful exertion of congressional authority over interstate commerce, but would
sanction an invasion by the federal power of the control of a matter purely
local in its character, and over which no authority has been delegated to
Congress in conferring the power to regulate commerce among the states.

30

We have neither authority nor disposition to question the motives of Congress
in enacting this legislation. The purposes intended must be attained
consistently with constitutional limitations and not by an invasion of the
powers of the states. This court has no more important function than that
which devolves upon it the obligation to preserve inviolate the constitutional
limitations upon the exercise of authority federal and state to the end that
each may continue to discharge, harmoniously with the other, the duties
entrusted to it by the Constitution.

31

In our view the necessary effect of this act is, by means of a prohibition
against the movement in interstate commerce of ordinary commercial commodities
to regulate the hours of labor of children in factories and mines within the
states, a purely state authority. Thus the act in a two-fold sense is
repugnant to the Constitution. It not only transcends the authority delegated
to Congress over commerce but also exerts a power as to a purely local matter
to which the federal authority does not extend. The far reaching result of
upholding the act cannot be more plainly indicated than by pointing out that
if Congress can thus regulate matters entrusted to local authority by
prohibition of the movement of commodities in interstate commerce, all freedom
of commerce will be at an end, and the power of the states over local matters
may be eliminated, and thus our system of government be practically destroyed.

32

For these reasons we hold that this law exceeds the constitutional authority
of Congress. It follows that the decree of the District Court must be

33

Affirmed.

34

Mr. Justice HOLMES, dissenting.

35

The single question in this case is whethe Congress has power to prohibit the
shipment in interstate or foreign commerce of any product of a cotton mill
situated in the United States, in which within thirty days before the removal
of the product children under fourteen have been employed, or children between
fourteen and sixteen have been employed more than eight hours in a day, or
more than six days in any week, or between seven in the evening and six in the
morning. The objection urged against the power is that the States have
exclusive control over their methods of production and that Congress cannot
meddle with them, and taking the proposition in the sense of direct
intermeddling I agree to it and suppose that no one denies it. But if an act
is within the powers specifically conferred upon Congress, it seems to me that
it is not made any less constitutional because of the indirect effects that it
may have, however obvious it may be that it will have those effects, and that
we are not at liberty upon such grounds to hold it void.

36

The first step in my argument is to make plain what no one is likely to
dispute--that the statute in question is within the power expressly given to
Congress if considered only as to its immediate effects and that if invalid it
is so only upon some collateral ground. The statute confines itself to
prohibiting the carriage of certain goods in interstate or foreign commerce.
Congress is given power to regulate such commerce in unqualified terms. It
would not be argued today that the power to regulate does not include the
power to prohibit. Regulation means the prohibition of something, and when
interstate commerce is the matter to be regulated I cannot doubt that the
regulation may prohibit any part of such commerce that Congress sees fit to
forbid. At all events it is established by the Lottery Case and others that
have followed it that a law is not beyond the regulative power of Congress
merely because it prohibits certain transportation out and out. Champion v.
Ames, 188 U. S. 321, 355, 359, 23 Sup. Ct. 321, 47 L. Ed. 492, et seq. So I
repeat that this statute in its immediate operation is clearly within the
Congress's constitutional power.

37

The question then is narrowed to whether the exercise of its otherwise
constitutional power by Congress can be pronounced unconstitutional because of
its possible reaction upon the conduct of the States in a matter upon which I
have admitted that they are free from direct control. I should have thought
that that matter had been disposed of so fully as to leave no room for doubt.
I should have thought that the most conspicuous decisions of this Court had
made it clear that the power to regulate commerce and other constitutional
powers could not be cut down or qualified by the fact that it might interfere
with the carrying out of the domestic policy of any State.

38

The manufacture of oleomargarine is as much a matter of State regulation as
the manufacture of cotton cloth. Congress levied a tax upon the compound when
colored so as to resemble butter that was so great as obviously to prohibit
the manufacture and sale. In a very elaborate discussion the present Chief
Justice excluded any inquiry into the purpose of an act which apart from that
purpose was within the power of Congress. McCray v. United States, 195 U. S.
27, 24 Sup. Ct. 769, 49 L. Ed. 78, 1 Ann. Cas. 561. As to foreign commerce see
Weber v. Freed, 239 U. S. 325, 329, 36 Sup. Ct. 131, 60 L. Ed. 308, Ann. Cas.
1916C, 317; Brolan v. United States, 236 U. S. 216, 217, 35 Sup. Ct. 285, 59
L. Ed. 544; Buttfield v. Stranahan, 192 U. S. 470, 24 Sup. Ct. 349, 48 L. Ed.
525. Fifty years ago a tax on state banks, the obvious purpose and actual
effect of which was to drive them, or at least their circulation, out of
existence, was sustained, although the result was one that Congress had no
constitutional power to require. The Court made short work of the argument as
to the purpose of the Act. 'The Judicial cannot prescribe to the Legislative
Departments of the Government l mitations upon the exercise of its
acknowledged powers.' Veazie Bank v. Fenno, 8 Wall. 533, 19 L. Ed. 482. So it
well might have been argued that the corporation tax was intended under the
guise of a revenue measure to secure a control not otherwise belonging to
Congress, but the tax was sustained, and the objection so far as noticed was
disposed of by citing McCray v. United States; Flint .v Stone Tracy Co., 220
U. S. 107, 31 Sup. Ct. 342, 55 L. Ed. 389, Ann. Cas. 1912B, 1312. And to come
to cases upon interstate commerce notwithstanding United States v. E. C.
Knight Co., 156 U. S. 1, 15 Sup. Ct. 249, 39 L. Ed. 325, the Sherman Act (Act
July 2, 1890, c. 647, 26 Stat. 209) has been made an instrument for the
breaking up of combinations in restraint of trade and monopolies, using the
power to regulate commerce as a foothold, but not proceeding because that
commerce was the end actually in mind. The objection that the control of the
States over production was interfered with was urged again and again but
always in vain. Standard Oil Co. v. United States, 221 U. S. 1, 68, 69, 31
Sup. Ct. 502, 55 L. Ed. 619, 34 L. R. A. (N. S.) 834, Ann. Cas. 1912D, 734;
United States v. American Tobacco Co., 221 U. S. 106, 184, 31 Sup. Ct. 632, 55
L. Ed. 663; Hoke v. United States, 227 U. S. 308, 321, 322, 33 Sup. Ct. 281,
57 L. Ed. 523, 43 L. R. A. (N. S.) 906, Ann. Cas. 1913E, 905. See finally and
especially Seven Cases of Eckman's Alterative v. United States, 239 U. S. 510,
514, 515, 36 Sup. Ct. 190, 60 L. Ed. 411, L. R. A. 1916D, 164.

39

The Pure Food and Drug Act which was sustained in Hipolite Egg Co. v. United
States, 220 U. S. 45, 57, 31 Sup. Ct. 364, 367 (55 L. Ed. 364), with the
intimation that 'no trade can be carried on between the States to which it
[the power of Congress to regulate commerce] does not extend,' applies not
merely to articles that the changing opinions of the time condemn as
intrinsically harmful but to others innocent in themselves, simply on the
ground that the order for them was induced by a preliminary fraud. Weeks v.
United States, 245 U. S. 618, 38 Sup. Ct. 219, 62 L. Ed. ----. It does not
matter whether the supposed evil precedes or follows the transportation. It is
enough that in the opinion of Congress the transportation encourages the evil.
I may add that in the cases on the so-called White Slave Act it was
established that the means adopted by Congress as convenient to the exercise
of its power might have the character af police regulations. Hoke v. United
States, 227 U. S. 308, 323, 33 Sup. Ct. 281, 57 L. Ed. 523, 43 L. R. A. (N.
S.) 906, Ann. Cas. 1913E, 905; Caminetti v. United States, 242 U. S. 470, 492,
37 Sup. Ct. 192, 61 L. Ed. 442, L. R. A. 1917F, 502, Ann. Cas. 1917B, 1168. In
Clark Distilling Co. v. Western Maryland Ry. Co., 242 U. S. 311, 328, 37 Sup.
Ct. 180, 61 L. Ed. 326, L. R. A. 1917B, 1218, Ann. Cas. 1917B, 845, Leisy v.
Hardin, 135 U. S. 100, 108, 10 Sup. Ct. 681, 34 L. Ed. 128, is quoted with
seeming approval to the effect that 'a subject matter which has been confided
exclusively to Congress by the Constitution is not within the jurisdiction of
the police power of the State unless placed there by congressional action.' I
see no reason for that proposition not applying here.

40

The notion that prohibition is any less prohibition when applied to things now
thought evil I do not understand. But if there is any matter upon which
civilized countries have agreed--far more unanimously than they have with
regard to intoxicants and some other matters over which this country is now
emotionally aroused--it is the evil of premature and excessive child labor. I
should have thought that if we were to introduce our own moral conceptions
where is my opinion they do not belong, this was preeminently a case for
upholding the exercise of all its powers by the United States.

41

But I had thought that the propriety of the exercise of a power admitted to
exist in some cases was for the consideration of Congress alone and that this
Court always had disavowed the right to intrude its udgment upon questions of
policy or morals. It is not for this Court to pronounce when prohibition is
necessary to regulation if it ever may be necessary--to say that it is
permissible as against strong drink but not as against the product of ruined
lives.

42

The Act does not meddle with anything belonging to the States. They may
regulate their internal affairs and their domestic commerce as they like. But
when they seek to send their products across the State line they are no longer
within their rights. If there were no Constitution and no Congress their power
to cross the line would depend upon their neighbors. Under the Constitution
such commerce belongs not to the States but to Congress to regulate. It may
carry out its views of public policy whatever indirect effect they may have
upon the activities of the States. Instead of being encountered by a
prohibitive tariff at her boundaries the State encounters the public policy of
the United States which it is for Congress to express. The public policy of
the United States is shaped with a view to the benefit of the nation as a
whole. If, as has been the case within the memory of men still living, a State
should take a different view of the propriety of sustaining a lottery from
that which generally prevails, I cannot believe that the fact would require a
different decision from that reached in Champion v. Ames. Yet in that case it
would be said with quite as much force as in this that Congress was attempting
to intermeddle with the State's domestic affairs. The national welfare as
understood by Congress may require a different attitude within its sphere from
that of some self-seeking State. It seems to me entirely constitutional for
Congress to enforce its understanding by all the means at its command.

43

Mr. Justice McKENNA, Mr. Justice BRANDEIS, and Mr. Justice CLARKE concur in
this opinion.

1

That no producer, manufacturer, or dealer shall ship or deliver for shipment
in interstate or foreign commerce any article or commodity the product of any
mine or quarry, situated in the United States, in which within thirty days
prior to the time of the removal of such product therefrom children under the
age of sixteen years have been employed or permitted to work, or any article
or commodity the product of any mill, cannery, workshop, factory, or
manufacturing establishment, situated in the United States, in which within
thirty days prior to the removal of such product therefrom children under the
age of fourteen years have been employed or permitted to work, or children
between the ages of fourteen years and sixteen years have been employed or
permitted to work more than eight hours in any day, or more t an six days in
any week, or after the hour of seven o'clock postmeridian, or before the hour
of six o'clock antemeridian.'

