462 U.S. 919

103 S.Ct. 2764

77 L.Ed.2d 317

IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE, Appellant  
v.  
Jagdish Rai CHADHA et al. UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, Petitioner
v. IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE et al. UNITED STATES SENATE,
Petitioner v. IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE et al.

Nos. 80-1832, 80-2170 and 80-2171.

Argued Feb. 22, 1982.

Reargued Oct. 7, 1982.

Decided June 23, 1983.

_Syllabus_

Section 244(c)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (Act) authorizes
either House of Congress, by resolution, to invalidate the decision of the
Executive Branch, pursuant to authority delegated by Congress to the Attorney
General, to allow a particular deportable alien to remain in the United
States. Appellee-respondent Chadha, an alien who had been lawfully admitted to
the United States on a nonimmigrant student visa, remained in the United
States after his visa had expired and was ordered by the Immigration and
Naturalization Service (INS) to show cause why he should not be deported. He
then applied for suspension of the deportation, and, after a hearing, an
Immigration Judge, acting pursuant to § 244(a)(1) of the Act, which authorizes
the Attorney General, in his discretion, to suspend deportation, ordered the
suspension, and reported the suspension to Congress as required by §
244(c)(1). Thereafter, the House of Representatives passed a Resolution
pursuant to § 244(c)(2) vetoing the suspension, and the Immigration Judge
reopened the deportation proceedings. Chadha moved to terminate the
proceedings on the ground that § 244(c)(2) is unconstitutional, but the judge
held that he had no authority to rule on its constitutionality and ordered
Chadha deported pursuant to the House Resolution. Chadha's appeal to the Board
of Immigration Appeals was dismissed, the Board also holding that it had no
power to declare § 244(c)(2) unconstitutional. Chadha then filed a petition
for review of the deportation order in the Court of Appeals, and the INS
joined him in arguing that § 244(c)(2) is unconstitutional. The Court of
Appeals held that § 244(c)(2) violates the constitutional doctrine of
separation of powers, and accordingly directed the Attorney General to cease
taking any steps to deport Chadha based upon the House Resolution.

_Held:_

1\. This Court has jurisdiction to entertain the INS's appeal in No. 80-1832
under 28 U.S.C. § 1252, which provides that "[a]ny party" may appeal to the
Supreme Court from a judgment of "any court of the United States" holding an
Act of Congress unconstitutional in "any civil action, suit or proceeding" to
which the United States or any of its agencies is a party. A court of appeals
is "a court of the United States" for purposes of § 1252, the proceeding below
was a "civil action, suit or proceeding," the INS is an agency of the United
States and was a party to the proceeding below, and the judgment below held an
Act of Congress unconstitutional. Moreover, for purposes of deciding whether
the INS was "any party" within the grant of appellate jurisdiction in § 1252,
the INS was sufficiently aggrieved by the Court of Appeals' decision
prohibiting it from taking action it would otherwise take. An agency's status
as an aggrieved party under § 1252 is not altered by the fact that the
Executive may agree with the holding that the statute in question is
unconstitutional. Pp. 929-931.

2\. Section 244(c)(2) is severable from the remainder of § 244\. Section 406
of the Act provides that if any particular provision of the Act is held
invalid, the remainder of the Act shall not be affected. This gives rise to a
presumption that Congress did not intend the validity of the Act as a whole,
or any part thereof, to depend upon whether the veto clause of § 244(c)(2) was
invalid. This presumption is supported by § 244's legislative history.
Moreover, a provision is further presumed severable if what remains after
severance is fully operative as a law. Here, § 244 can survive as a "fully
operative" and workable administrative mechanism without the one-house veto.
Pp. 931-935.

3\. Chadha has standing to challenge the constitutionality of § 244(c)(2)
since he has demonstrated "injury in fact and a substantial likelihood that
the judicial relief requested will prevent or redress the claimed injury."
_Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental Study Group,_ 438 U.S. 59, 79, 98
S.Ct. 2620, 2633, 57 L.Ed.2d 595. Pp.935-936

4\. The fact that Chadha may have other statutory relief available to him does
not preclude him from challenging the constitutionality of § 244(c)(2),
especially where the other avenues of relief are at most speculative. Pp.
936-937.

5\. The Court of Appeals had jurisdiction under § 106(a) of the Act, which
provides that a petition for review in a court of appeals "shall be the sole
and exclusive procedure for the judicial review of all final orders of
deportation . . . made against aliens within the United States pursuant to
administrative proceedings" under § 242(b) of the Act. Section 106(a) includes
all matters on which the final deportation order is contingent, rather than
only those determinations made at the deportation hearing. Here, Chadha's
deportation stands or falls on the validity of the challenged veto, the final
deportation order having been entered only to implement that veto. Pp.
937-939.

6\. A case or controversy is presented by these cases. From the time of the
House's formal intervention, there was concrete adverseness, and prior to such
intervention, there was adequate Art. III adverseness even though the only
parties were the INS and Chadha. The INS's agreement with Chadha's position
does not alter the fact that the INS would have deported him absent the Court
of Appeals' judgment. Moreover, Congress is the proper party to defend the
validity of a statute when a Government agency, as a defendant charged with
enforcing the statute, agrees with plaintiffs that the statute is
unconstitutional. Pp.939-940

7\. These cases do not present a nonjusticiable political question on the
asserted ground that Chadha is merely challenging Congress' authority under
the Naturalization and Necessary and Proper Clauses of the Constitution. The
presence of constitutional issues with significant political overtones does
not automatically invoke the political question doctrine. Resolution of
litigation challenging the constitutional authority of one of the three
branches cannot be evaded by the courts simply because the issues have
political implications. Pp. 940-943.

8\. The congressional veto provision in § 244(c)(2) is unconstitutional. Pp.
944-959.

(a) The prescription for legislative action in Art. I, § 1 requiring all
legislative powers to be vested in a Congress consisting of a Senate and a
House of Representatives--and § 7 requiring every bill passed by the House and
Senate, before becoming law, to be presented to the President, and, if he
disapproves, to be repassed by two-thirds of the Senate and House represents
the Framers' decision that the legislative power of the Federal Government be
exercised in accord with a single, finely wrought and exhaustively considered
procedure. This procedure is an integral part of the constitutional design for
the separation of powers. Pp. 944-951.

(b) Here, the action taken by the House pursuant to § 244(c)(2) was
essentially legislative in purpose and effect and thus was subject to the
procedural requirements of Art. I, § 7, for _legislative_ action: passage by a
majority of both Houses and presentation to the President. The one-House veto
operated to overrule the Attorney General and mandate Chadha's deportation.
The veto's legislative character is confirmed by the character of the
congressional action it supplants; _i.e.,_ absent the veto provision of §
244(c)(2), neither the House nor the Senate, or both acting together, could
effectively require the Attorney General to deport an alien once the Attorney
General, in the exercise of legislatively delegated authority, had determined
that the alien should remain in the United States. Without the veto provision,
this could have been achieved only by legislation requiring deportation. A
veto by one House under § 244(c)(2) cannot be justified as an attempt at
amending the standards set out in § 244(a)(1), or as a repeal of § 244 as
applied to Chadha. The nature of the decision implemented by the one-House
veto further manifests its legislative character. Congress must abide by its
delegation of authority to the Attorney General until that delegation is
legislatively altered or revoked. Finally, the veto's legislative character is
confirmed by the fact that when the Framers intended to authorize either House
of Congress to act alon and outside of its prescribed bicameral legislative
role, they narrowly and precisely defined the procedure for such action in the
Constitution. Pp. 951- 959.

634 F.2d 408, affirmed.

Eugene Gressman, Chapel Hill, N.C., for U.S. House of Representatives, Michael
Davidson, Washington, D.C., for U.S. Senate.

Rex Lee, Sol. Gen., Washington, D.C., for I.N.S.

Alan B. Morrison, Washington, D.C., for Chadha.

Chief Justice BURGER delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

We granted certiorari in Nos. 80-2170 and 80-2171, and postponed consideration
of the question of jurisdiction in No. 80-1832. Each presents a challenge to
the constitutionality of the provision in § 244(c)(2) of the Immigration and
Nationality Act, 8 U.S.C. § 1254(c)(2), authorizing one House of Congress, by
resolution, to invalidate the decision of the Executive Branch, pursuant to
authority delegated by Congress to the Attorney General of the United States,
to allow a particular deportable alien to remain in the United States.

2

* Chadha is an East Indian who was born in Kenya and holds a British passport. He was lawfully admitted to the United States in 1966 on a nonimmigrant student visa. His visa expired on June 30, 1972. On October 11, 1973, the District Director of the Immigration and Naturalization Service ordered Chadha to show cause why he should not be deported for having "remained in the United States for a longer time than permitted." App. 6. Pursuant to § 242(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (Act), 8 U.S.C. § 1252(b), a deportation hearing was held before an immigration judge on January 11, 1974. Chadha conceded that he was deportable for overstaying his visa and the hearing was adjourned to enable him to file an application for suspension of deportation under § 244(a)(1) of the Act, 8 U.S.C. § 1254(a)(1). Section 244(a)(1) provides:

3

"(a) As hereinafter prescribed in this section, the Attorney General may, in
his discretion, suspend deportation and adjust the status to that of an alien
lawfully admitted for permanent residence, in the case of an alien who applies
to the Attorney General for suspension of deportation and--

4

(1) is deportable under any law of the United States except the provisions
specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection; has been physically present in
the United States for a continuous period of not less than seven years
immediately preceding the date of such application, and proves that during all
of such period he was and is a person of good moral character; and is a person
whose deportation would, in the opinion of the Attorney General, result in
extreme hardship to the alien or to his spouse, parent, or child, who is a
citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent
residence."1

5

After Chadha submitted his application for suspension of deportation, the
deportation hearing was resumed on February 7, 1974. On the basis of evidence
adduced at the hearing, affidavits submitted with the application, and the
results of a character investigation conducted by the INS, the immigration
judge, on June 25, 1974, ordered that Chadha's deportation be suspended. The
immigration judge found that Chadha met the requirements of § 244(a)(1): he
had resided continuously in the United States for over seven years, was of
good moral character, and would suffer "extreme hardship" if deported.

6

Pursuant to § 244(c)(1) of the Act, 8 U.S.C. § 1254(c)(1), the immigration
judge suspended Chadha's deportation and a report of the suspension was
transmitted to Congress. Section 244(c)(1) provides:

7

"Upon application by any alien who is found by the Attorney General to meet
the require ents of subsection (a) of this section the Attorney General may in
his discretion suspend deportation of such alien. If the deportation of any
alien is suspended under the provisions of this subsection, a complete and
detailed statement of the facts and pertinent provisions of law in the case
shall be reported to the Congress with the reasons for such suspension. Such
reports shall be submitted on the first day of each calendar month in which
Congress is in session."

8

Once the Attorney General's recommendation for suspension of Chadha's
deportation was conveyed to Congress, Congress had the power under § 244(c)(2)
of the Act, 8 U.S.C. § 1254(c)(2), to veto2 the Attorney General's
determination that Chadha should not be deported. Section 244(c)(2) provides:

9

"(2) In the case of an alien specified in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of
this subsection--

10

if during the session of the Congress at which a case is reported, or prior to
the close of the session of the Congress next following the session at which a
case is reported, either the Senate or the House of Representatives passes a
resolution stating in substance that it does not favor the suspension of such
deportation, the Attorney General shall thereupon deport such alien or
authorize the alien's voluntary departure at his own expense under the order
of deportation in the manner provided by law. If, within the time above
specified, neither the Senate nor the House of Representatives shall pass such
a resolution, the Attorney General shall cancel deportation proceedings." The
June 25, 1974 order of the immigration judge suspending Chadha's deportation
remained outstanding as a valid order for a year and a half. For reasons not
disclosed by the record, Congress did not exercise the veto authority reserved
to it under § 244(c)(2) until the first session of the 94th Congress. This was
the final session in which Congress, pursuant to § 244(c)(2), could act to
veto the Attorney General's determination that Chadha should not be deported.
The session ended on December 19, 1975. 121 Cong.Rec. 42014, 42277 (1975).
Absent Congressional action, Chadha's deportation proceedings would have been
cancelled after this date and his status adjusted to that of a permanent
resident alien. See 8 U.S.C. § 1254(d).

11

On December 12, 1975, Representative Eilberg, Chairman of the Judiciary
Subcommittee on Immigration, Citizenship, and International Law, introduced a
resolution opposing "the granting of permanent residence in the United States
to [six] aliens", including Chadha. H.R.Res. 926, 94th Cong., 1st Sess.; 121
Cong.Rec. 40247 (1975). The resolution was referred to the House Committee on
the Judiciary. On December 16, 1975, the resolution was discharged from
further consideration by the House Committee on the Judiciary and submitted to
the House of Representatives for a vote. 121 Cong.Rec. 40800. The resolution
had not been printed and was not made available to other Members of the House
prior to or at the time it was voted on. _Ibid._ So far as the record before
us shows, the House consideration of the resolution was based on
Representative Eilberg's statement from the floor that

12

"[i]t was the feeling of the committee, after reviewing 340 cases, that the
aliens contained in the resolution [Chadha and five others] did not meet these
statutory requirements, particularly as it relates to hardship; and it is the
opinion of the committee that their deportation should not be suspended."
_Ibid._ The resolution was passed without debate or recorded vote.3 Since the
House action was pursuant to § 244(c)(2), the resolution was not treated as an
Article I legislative act; it was not submitted to the Senate or presented to
the President for his action.

13

After the House veto of the Attorney General's decision to allow Chadha to
remain in the United States, the immigration judge reopened the deportation
proceedings to implement the House order deporting Chadha. Chadha moved to
terminate the proceedings on the ground that § 244(c)(2) is unconstitutional.
The immigration judge held that he had no authority to rule on the
constitutional validity of § 244(c)(2). On November 8, 1976, Chadha was
ordered deported pursuant to the House action.

14

Chadha appealed the deportation order to the Board of Immigration Appeals
again contending that § 244(c)(2) is unconstitutional. The Board held that it
had "no power to declare unconstitutional an act of Congress" and Chadha's
appeal was dismissed. App. 55-56.

15

Pursuant to § 106(a) of the Act, 8 U.S.C. § 1105a(a), Chadha filed a petition
for review of the deportation order in the United States Court of Appeals for
the Ninth Circuit. The Immigration and Naturalization Service agreed with
Chadha's position before the Court of Appeals and joined him in arguing that §
244(c)(2) is unconsti utional. In light of the importance of the question, the
Court of Appeals invited both the Senate and the House of Representatives to
file briefs _amici curiae._

16

After full briefing and oral argument, the Court of Appeals held that the
House was without constitutional authority to order Chadha's deportation;
accordingly it directed the Attorney General "to cease and desist from taking
any steps to deport this alien based upon the resolution enacted by the House
of Representatives." _Chadha v. INS,_ 634 F.2d 408, 436 (CA9 1980). The
essence of its holding was that § 244(c)(2) violates the constitutional
doctrine of separation of powers.

17

We granted certiorari in Nos. 80-2170 and 80-2171, and postponed consideration
of our jurisdiction over the appeal in No. 80-1832, 454 U.S. 812, 102 S.Ct.
87, 70 L.Ed.2d 80 (1981), and we now affirm.

II

18

Before we address the important question of the constitutionality of the one-
House veto provision of § 244(c)(2), we first consider several challenges to
the authority of this Court to resolve the issue raised.

19

* Appellate Jurisdiction

20

Both Houses of Congress4 contend that we are without jurisdiction under 28
U.S.C. § 1252 to entertain the INS appeal in No. 80-1832. Section 1252
provides:

21

"Any party may appeal to the Supreme Court from an interlocutory or final
judgment, decree or order of any court of the United States, the United States
District Court for the District of the Canal Zone, the District Court of Guam
and the District Court of the Virgin Islands and any court of record of Puerto
Rico, holding an Act of Congress unconstitutional in any civil action, suit,
or proceeding to which the United States or any of its agencies, or any
officer or employee thereof, as such officer or employee, is a party."

22

_Parker v. Levy,_ 417 U.S. 733, 742, n. 10, 94 S.Ct. 2547, 2555, n. 10, 41
L.Ed.2d 439 (1974), makes clear that a court of appeals is a "court of the
United States" for purposes of § 1252\. It is likewise clear that the
proceeding below was a "civil action, suit or proceeding," that the INS is an
agency of the United States and was a party to the proceeding below, and that
that proceeding held an Act of Congress--namely, the one-House veto provision
in § 244(c)(2)--unconstitutional. The express requisites for an appeal under §
1252, therefore, have been met.

23

In motions to dismiss the INS appeal, the Congressional parties5 direct
attention, however, to our statement that "[a] party who receives all that he
has sought generally is not aggrieved by the judgment affording relief and
cannot appeal from it." _Deposit Guaranty National Bank v. Roper,_ 445 U.S.
326, 333, 100 S.Ct. 1166, 1171, 63 L.Ed.2d 427 (1980). Here, the INS sought
the invalidation of § 244(c)(2) and the Court of Appeals granted that relief.
Both Houses contend that the INS has already received what it sought from the
Court of Appeals, is not an aggrieved party, and therefore cannot appeal from
the decision of the Court of Appeals. We cannot agree.

24

The INS was ordered by one House of Congress to deport Chadha. As we have set
out more fully, _ante_ at 928, the INS concluded that it had no power to rule
on the constitutionality of that order and accor ingly proceeded to implement
it. Chadha's appeal challenged that decision and the INS presented the
Executive's views on the constitutionality of the House action to the Court of
Appeals. But the INS brief to the Court of Appeals did not alter the agency's
decision to comply with the House action ordering deportation of Chadha. The
Court of Appeals set aside the deportation proceedings and ordered the
Attorney General to cease and desist from taking any steps to deport Chadha;
steps that the Attorney General would have taken were it not for that
decision.

25

At least for purposes of deciding whether the INS is "any party" within the
grant of appellate jurisdiction in § 1252, we hold that the INS was
sufficiently aggrieved by the Court of Appeals decision prohibiting it from
taking action it would otherwise take. It is apparent that Congress intended
that this Court take notice of cases that meet the technical prerequisites of
§ 1252; in other cases where an Act of Congress is held unconstitutional by a
federal court, review in this Court is available only by writ of certiorari.
When an agency of the United States is a party to a case in which the Act of
Congress it administers is held unconstitutional, it is an aggrieved party for
purposes of taking an appeal under § 1252\. The agency's status as an
aggrieved party under § 1252 is not altered by the fact that the Executive may
agree with the holding that the statute in question is unconstitutional. The
appeal in No. 80-1832 is therefore properly before us.6

B

Severability

26

Congress also contends that the provision for the one-House veto in §
244(c)(2) cannot be severed from § 244\. Congress argues that if the provision
for the one-House veto is held unconstitutional, all of § 244 must fall. If §
244 in its entirety is violative of the Constitution, it follows that the
Attorney General has no authority to suspend Chadha's deportation under §
244(a)(1) and Chadha would be deported. From this, Congress argues that Chadha
lacks standing to challenge the constitutionality of the one-House veto
provision because he could receive no relief even if his constitutional
challenge proves successful.7

27

Only recently this Court reaffirmed that the invalid portions of a statute are
to be severed " '[u]nless it is evident that the Legislature would not have
enacted those provisions which are within its power, independently of that
which is not.' " _Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 108, 96 S.Ct. 612, 677, 46
L.Ed.2d 659 (1976), quoting _Champlin Refining Co. v. Corporation Comm'n,_ 286
U.S. 210, 234, 52 S.Ct. 559, 565, 76 L.Ed. 1062 (1932). Here, however, we need
not embark on that elusive inquiry since Congress itself has provided the
answer to the question of severability in § 406 of the Immigration and
Nationality Act, 8 U.S.C. § 1101 note, which provides:

28

"If _any_ particular provision of this Act, or the application thereof to
_any_ person or circumstance, is held invalid, _the remainder of the Act and
the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not
be affected thereby._ " (Emphasis added.)

29

This language is unambiguous and gives rise to a presumption that Congress did
not intend the validity of the Act as a whole, or of any part of the Act, to
depend upon whether the veto clause of § 244(c)(2) was invalid. The one-House
veto provision in § 244(c)(2) is clearly a "particular provision" of the Act
as that language is used in the severability clause. Congress clearly intended
"the remainder of the Act" to stand if "any particular provision" were held
invalid. Congress could not have more plainly authorized the presumption that
the provision for a one-House veto in § 244(c)(2) is severable from the
remainder of § 244 and the Act of which it is a part. See _Electric Bond &
Share Co. v. SEC,_ 303 U.S. 419, 434, 58 S.Ct. 678, 683, 82 L.Ed. 936 (1938).

30

The presumption as to the severability of the one-House veto provision in §
244(c)(2) is supported by the legislative history of § 244\. That section and
its precursors supplanted the long established pattern of dealing with
deportations like Chadha's on a case-by-case basis through private bills.
Although it may be that Congress was reluctant to delegate final authority
over cancellation of deportations, such reluctance is not sufficient to
overcome the presumption of severability raised by § 406.

31

The Immigration Act of 1924, Pub.L. No. 139, § 14, 43 Stat. 153, 162, required
the Secretary of Labor to deport any alien who entered or remained in the
United States unlawfully. The only means by which a deportable alien could
lawfully remain in the United States was to have his status altered by a
private bill enacted by both Houses and presented to the President pursuant to
the procedures set out in Art. I, § 7 of the Constitution. These private bills
were found intolerable by Congress. In the debate on a 1937 bill introduced by
Representative Dies to authorize the Secretary to grant permanent residence in
"meritorious" cases, Dies stated:

32

"It was my original thought that the way to handle all these meritorious cases
was through special bills. I am absolutely convinced as a result of what has
occurred in this House that it is impossible to deal with the situation
through special bills. We had a demonstration of that fact not long ago when
15 special bills were before the House. The House consumed 51/2 hours
considering four bills and made no disposition of any of these bills." 81
Cong.Rec. 5542 (1937).

33

Representative Dies' bill passed the House, _id.,_ at 5574, but did not come
to a vote in the Senate. 83 Cong.Rec. 8992-8996 (1938).

34

Congress first authorized the Attorney General to suspend the deportation of
certain aliens in the Alien Registration Act of 1940, ch. 439, § 20, 54 Stat.
671. That Act provided that an alien was to be deported, despite the Attorney
General's decision to the contrary, if both Houses, by concurrent resolution,
disapproved the suspension.

35

In 1948, Congress amended the Act to broaden the category of aliens eligible
for suspension of deportation. In addition, however, Congress limited the
authority of the Attorney General to suspend deportations by providing that
the Attorney General could not cancel a deportation unless both Houses
affirmatively voted by concurrent resolution to _approve_ the Attorney
General's action. Act of July 1, 1948, ch. 783, 62 Stat. 1206. The provision
for approval by concurrent resolution in the 1948 Act proved almost as
burdensome as private bills. Just four years later, the House Judiciary
Committee, in support of the predecessor to § 244(c)(2), stated in a report:

36

"In the light of experience of the last several months, the committee came to
the conclusion that the requirements of affirmative action by both Houses of
the Congress in many thousands of individual cases which are submitted by the
Attorney General every year, is not workable and places upon the Congress and
particularly on the Committee on the Judiciary responsibilities which it
cannot assume. The new responsibilities placed upon the Committee on the
Judiciary [by the concurrent resolution mechanism] are of purely
administrative natur and they seriously interfere with the legislative work of
the Committee on the Judiciary and would, in time, interfere with the
legislative work of the House." H.R.Rep. No. 362, 81st Cong., 1st Sess. 2
(1949).

37

The proposal to permit one House of Congress to veto the Attorney General's
suspension of an alien's deportation was incorporated in the Immigration and
Nationality Act of 1952, Pub.L. No. 414, 66 Stat. 163, 214. Plainly, Congress'
desire to retain a veto in this area cannot be considered in isolation but
must be viewed in the context of Congress' irritation with the burden of
private immigration bills. This legislative history is not sufficient to rebut
the presumption of severability raised by § 406 because there is insufficient
evidence that Congress would have continued to subject itself to the onerous
burdens of private bills had it known that § 244(c)(2) would be held
unconstitutional.

38

A provision is further presumed severable if what remains after severance "is
fully operative as a law." _Champlin Refining Co. v. Corporation Comm'n,
supra,_ 286 U.S., at 234, 52 S.Ct., at 565. There can be no doubt that § 244
is "fully operative" and workable administrative machinery without the veto
provision in § 244(c)(2). Entirely independent of the one-House veto, the
administrative process enacted by Congress authorizes the Attorney General to
suspend an alien's deportation under § 244(a). Congress' oversight of the
exercise of this delegated authority is preserved since all such suspensions
will continue to be reported to it under § 244(c)(1). Absent the passage of a
bill to the contrary,8 deportation proceedings will be cancelled when the
period specified in § 244(c)(2) has expired.9 Clearly, § 244 survives as a
workable administrative mechanism without the one-House veto.

C

Standing

39

We must also reject the contention that Chadha lacks standing because a
consequence of his prevailing will advance the interests of the Executive
Branch in a separation of powers dispute with Congress, rather than simply
Chadha's private interests. Chadha has dem nstrated "injury in fact and a
substantial likelihood that the judicial relief requested will prevent or
redress the claimed injury. . . ." _Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental
Study Group,_ 438 U.S. 59, 79, 98 S.Ct. 2620, 2633, 57 L.Ed.2d 595 (1978). If
the veto provision violates the Constitution, and is severable, the
deportation order against Chadha will be cancelled. Chadha therefore has
standing to challenge the order of the Executive mandated by the House veto.

D

Alternative Relief

40

It is contended that the Court should decline to decide the constitutional
question presented by this case because Chadha may have other statutory relief
available to him. It is argued that since Chadha married a United States
citizen on August 10, 1980, it is possible that other avenues of relief may be
open under §§ 201(b), 204, and 245 of the Act, 8 U.S.C. §§ 1151(b), 1154,
1255. It is true that Chadha may be eligible for classification as an
"immediate relative" and, as such, could lawfully be accorded permanent
residence. Moreover, in March 1980, just prior to the decision of the Court of
Appeals in this case, Congress enacted the Refugee Act of 1980, Pub.L. No.
96-212, 94 Stat. 102, under which the Attorney General is authorized to grant
asylum, and then permanent residence, to any alien who is unable to return to
his country of nationality because of "a well-founded fear of persecution on
account of race."

41

It is urged that these two intervening factors constitute a prudential bar to
our consideration of the constitutional question presented in this case. See
_Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley Authority,_ 297 U.S. 288, 346, 56 S.Ct. 466,
482, 80 L.Ed. 688 (1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring). If we could perceive
merit in this contention we might well seek to avoid deciding the
constitutional claim advanced. But at most these other avenues of relief are
speculative. It is by no means certain, for example, that Chadha's
classification as an immediate relative would result in the adjustment of
Chadha's status from nonimmigrant to permanent resident. See _Menezes v. INS,_
601 F.2d 1028 (CA9 1979). If Chadha is successful in his present challenge he
will not be deported and will automatically become eligible to apply for
citizenship.10 A person threatened with deportation cannot be denied the right
to challenge the constitutional validity of the process which led to his
status merely on the basis of speculation over the availability of other forms
of relief.

E

Jurisdiction

42

It is contended that the Court of Appeals lacked jurisdiction under § 106(a)
of the Act, 8 U.S.C. § 1105a(a). That section provides that a petition for
review in the Court of Appeals "shall be the sole and exclusive procedure for
the judicial review of all final orders of deportation . . . made against
aliens within the United States pursuant to administrative proceedings under
section 242(b) of this Act." Congress argues that the one-House veto
authorized by § 244(c)(2) takes place outside the administrative proceedings
conducted under § 242(b), and that the jurisdictional grant contained in §
106(a) does not encompass Chadha's constitutional challenge.

43

In _Cheng Fan Kwok v. INS,_ 392 U.S. 206, 216, 88 S.Ct. 1970, 1976, 20 L.Ed.2d
1037 (1968), this Court held that "§ 106(a) embrace[s] only those
determinations made during a proceeding conducted under § 242(b), including
those determinations made inc dent to a motion to reopen such proceedings." It
is true that one court has read _Cheng Fan Kwok_ to preclude appeals similar
to Chadha's. See _Dastmalchi v. INS,_ 660 F.2d 880 (CA3 1981).11 However, we
agree with the Court of Appeals in this case that the term "final orders" in §
106(a) "includes all matters on which the validity of the final order is
contingent, rather than only those determinations actually made at the
hearing." 634 F.2d, at 412. Here, Chadha's deportation stands or falls on the
validity of the challenged veto; the final order of deportation was entered
against Chadha only to implement the action of the House of Representatives.
Although the Attorney General was satisfied that the House action was invalid
and that it should not have any effect on his decision to suspend deportation,
he appropriately let the controversy take its course through the courts.

44

This Court's decision in _Cheng Fan Kwok, supra,_ does not bar Chadha's
appeal. There, after an order of deportation had been entered, the affected
alien requested the INS to stay the execution of that order. When that request
was denied, the alien sought review in the Court of Appeals under § 106(a).
This Court's holding that the Court of Appeals lacked jurisdiction was based
on the fact that the alien "did not 'attack the deportation order itself but
instead [sought] relief not inconsistent with it.' " 392 U.S., at 213, 88
S.Ct., at 1975, quoting _Mui v. Esperdy,_ 371 F.2d 772, 777 (CA2 1966). Here,
in contrast, Chadha directly attacks the deportation order itself and the
relief he seeks--cancellation of deportation--is plainly inconsistent with the
deportation order. Accordingly, the Court of Appeals had jurisdiction under §
106(a) to decide this case.

F

Case or Controversy

45

It is also contended that this is not a genuine controversy but "a friendly,
non-adversary, proceeding," _Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley Authority, supra,_
297 U.S., at 346, 56 S.Ct., at 482 (Brandeis, J., concurring), upon which the
Court should not pass. This argument rests on the fact that Chadha and the INS
take the same position on the constitutionality of the one-House veto. But it
would be a curious result if, in the administration of justice, a person could
be denied access to the courts because the Attorney General of the United
States agreed with the legal arguments asserted by the individual.

46

A case or controversy is presented by this case. First, from the time of
Congress' formal intervention, see note 5, _supra,_ the concrete adverseness
is beyond doubt. Congress is both a proper party to defend the
constitutionality of § 244(c)(2) and a proper petitioner under § 1254(1).
Second, prior to Congress' intervention, there was adequate Art. III
adverseness even though the only parties were the INS and Chadha. We have
already held that the INS's agreement with the Court of Appeals' decision that
§ 244(c)(2) is unconstitutional does not affect that agency's "aggrieved"
status for purposes of appealing that decision under 28 U.S.C. § 1252, see
_ante,_ at 929-931. For similar reasons, the INS's agreement with Chadha's
posit on does not alter the fact that the INS would have deported Chadha
absent the Court of Appeals' judgment. We agree with the Court of Appeals that
"Chadha has asserted a concrete controversy, and our decision will have real
meaning: if we rule for Chadha, he will not be deported; if we uphold §
244(c)(2), the INS will execute its order and deport him." 634 F.2d, at 419.12

47

Of course, there may be prudential, as opposed to Art. III, concerns about
sanctioning the adjudication of this case in the absence of any participant
supporting the validity of § 244(c)(2). The Court of Appeals properly
dispelled any such concerns by inviting and accepting briefs from both Houses
of Congress. We have long held that Congress is the proper party to defend the
validity of a statute when an agency of government, as a defendant charged
with enforcing the statute, agrees with plaintiffs that the statute is
inapplicable or unconstitutional. See _Cheng Fan Kwok v. INS, supra,_ 392
U.S., at 210 n. 9, 88 S.Ct., at 1973 n. 9; _United States v. Lovett,_ 328 U.S.
303, 66 S.Ct. 1073, 90 L.Ed. 1252 (1946).

G

Political Question

48

It is also argued that this case presents a nonjusticiable political question
because Chadha is merely challenging Congress' authority under the
Naturalization Clause, U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 4, and the Necessary and
Proper Clause, U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 18. It is argued that Congress'
Article I power "To establish a uniform Rule of Naturalization", combined with
the Necessary and Proper Clause, grants it unreviewable authority over the
regulation of aliens. The plenary authority of Congress over aliens under Art.
I, § 8, cl. 4 is not open to question, but what is challenged here is whether
Congress has chosen a constitutionally permissible means of implementing that
power. As we made clear in _Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 96 S.Ct. 612, 46
L.Ed.2d 659 (1976); "Congress has plenary authority in all cases in which it
has substantive legislative jurisdiction, _M'Culloch v. Maryland,_ 4 Wheat.
316 [4 L.Ed. 579] (1819), so long as the exercise of that authority does not
offend some other constitutional restriction." _Id.,_ 424 U.S., at 132, 96
S.Ct., at 688.

49

A brief review of those factors which may indicate the presence of a
nonjusticiable political question satisfies us that our assertion of
jurisdiction over this case does no violence to the political question
doctrine. As identified in _Baker v. Carr,_ 369 U.S. 186, 217, 82 S.Ct. 691,
710, 7 L.Ed.2d 663 (1962), a political question may arise when any one of the
following circumstances is present:

50

"a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a
coordinate political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable and
manageable standards for resolving it; or the impossibility of deciding
without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial
discretion; or the impossibility of a court's undertaking independent
resolution without expressing lack of the respect due coordinate branches of
government; or an unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political
decision already made; or the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious
pronouncements by various departments on one question."

51

Congress apparently directs its assertion of nonjusticiability to the first of
the _Baker_ factors by asserting that Chadha's claim is "an assault on the
legislative authority to enact Section 244(c)(2)." Brief for the United States
House of Representatives 48. But if this turns the question into a political
question virtually every challenge to the constitutionality of a statute would
be a political question. Chadha indeed argues that one House of Congress
cannot constitutionally veto the Attorney General's decision to allow him to
remain in this country. No policy underlying the political question doctrine
suggests that Congress or the Executive, or both acting in concert and in
compliance with Art. I, can decide the constitutionality of a statute; that is
a decision for the courts.13

52

Other _Baker_ factors are likewise inapplicable to this case. As we discuss
more fully below, Art. I provides the "judicially discoverable and manageable
standards" of _Baker_ for resolving the question presented by this case. Those
standards forestall reliance by this Court on nonjudicial "policy
determinations" or any showing of disrespect for a coordinate branch.
Similarly, if Chadha's arguments are accepted, § 244(c)(2) cannot stand, and,
since the constitutionality of that statute is for this Court to resolve,
there is no possibility of "multifarious pronouncements" on this question.

53

It is correct that this controversy may, in a sense, be termed "political."
But the presence of constitutional issues with significant political overtones
does not automatically invoke the political question doctrine. Resolution of
litigation challenging the constitutional authority of one of the three
branches cannot be evaded by courts because the issues have political
implications in the sense urged by Congress. _Marbury v. Madison,_ 1 Cranch
137, 2 L.Ed. 60 (1803), was also a "political" case, involving as it did
claims under a judicial commission alleged to have been duly signed by the
President but not delivered. But "courts cannot reject as 'no law suit' a bona
fide controversy as to whether some action denominated 'political' exceeds
constitutional authority." _Baker v. Carr, supra,_ 369 U.S., at 217, 82 S.Ct.,
at 710.

54

In _Field v. Clark,_ 143 U.S. 649, 12 S.Ct. 495, 36 L.Ed. 294 (1892), this
Court addressed and resolved the question whether

55

"a bill signed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and by the
President of the Senate, presented to and approved by the President of the
United States, and delivered by the latter to the Secretary of State, as an
act passed by Congress, does not become a law of the United States if it had
not in fact been passed by Congress.

56

* * * * *

57

We recognize, on one hand, the duty of this court, from the performance of
which it may not shrink, to give full effect to the provisions of the
Constitution relating to the enactment of laws that are to operate wherever
the authority and jurisdiction of the United States extend. On the other hand,
we cannot be unmindful of the consequences that must result if this court
should feel obliged, in fidelity to the Constitution, to declare that an
enrolled bill, on which depend public and private interests of vast magnitude,
and which has been . . . deposited in the public archives, _as an act of
Congress,_ . . . did not become law." _Id.,_ at 669, 670, 12 S.Ct., at 496,
497 (emphasis in original).

H

58

The contentions on standing and justiciability have been fully examined and we
are satisfied the parties are properly before us. The important issues have
been fully briefed and twice argued, 454 U.S. 812, 102 S.Ct. 87, 70 L.Ed.2d
80, 81 (1982). The Court's duty in this case, as Chief Justice Marshall
declared in _Cohens v. Virginia,_ 6 Wheat. 264, 404, 5 L.Ed. 257 (1821), is
clear:

59

"Questions may occur which we would gladly avoid; but we cannot avoid them.
All we can do is, to exercise our best judgment, and conscientiously to
perform our duty."

III

A.

60

We turn now to the question whether action of one House of Congress under §
244(c)(2) violates strictures of the Constitution. We begin, of course, with
the presumption that the challenged statute is valid. Its wisdom is not the
concern of the courts; if a challenged action does not violate the
Constitution, it must be sustained:

61

"Once the meaning of an enactment is discerned and its constitutionality
determined, the judicial process comes to an end. We do not sit as a committee
of review, nor are we vested with the power of veto." _Tennessee Valley
Authority v. Hill,_ 437 U.S. 153, 194-195, 98 S.Ct. 2279, 2302, 57 L.Ed.2d 117
(1978).

62

By the same token, the fact that a given law or procedure is efficient,
convenient, and useful in facilitating functions of government, standing
alone, will not save it if it is contrary to the Constitution. Convenience and
efficiency are not the primary objectives--or the hallmarks--of democratic
government and our inquiry is sharpened rather than blunted by the fact that
Congressional veto provisions are appearing with increasing frequency in
statutes which delegate authority to executive and independent agencies:

63

"Since 1932, when the first veto provision was enacted into law, 295
congressional veto-type procedures have been inserted in 196 different
statutes as follows: from 1932 to 1939, five statutes were affected; from
1940-49, nineteen statutes; between 1950-59, thirty-four statutes; and from
1960-69, forty-nine. From the year 1970 through 1975, at least one hundred
sixty-three such provisions were included in eighty-nine laws." Abourezk, The
Congressional Veto: A Contemporary Response to Executive Encroachment on
Legislative Prerogatives, 52 Ind.L.Rev. 323, 324 (1977). See also Appendix 1
to Justice WHITE's dissent, _post,_.

64

Justice WHITE undertakes to make a case for the proposition that the one-House
veto is a useful "political inv ntion," _post,_ at 972, and we need not
challenge that assertion. We can even concede this utilitarian argument
although the long range political wisdom of this "invention" is arguable. It
has been vigorously debated and it is instructive to compare the views of the
protagonists. See, e.g., Javits & Klein, Congressional Oversight and the
Legislative Veto: A Constitutional Analysis, 52 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 455 (1977), and
Martin, The Legislative Veto and the Responsible Exercise of Congressional
Power, 68 Va.L.Rev. 253 (1982). But policy arguments supporting even useful
"political inventions" are subject to the demands of the Constitution which
defines powers and, with respect to this subject, sets out just how those
powers are to be exercised.

65

Explicit and unambiguous provisions of the Constitution prescribe and define
the respective functions of the Congress and of the Executive in the
legislative process. Since the precise terms of those familiar provisions are
critical to the resolution of this case, we set them out verbatim. Art. I
provides:

66

"All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the
United States, which shall consist of a Senate _and_ a House of
Representatives." Art. I, § 1\. (Emphasis added).

67

"Every Bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives _and_ the
Senate, _shall,_ before it becomes a Law, be presented to the President of the
United States; . . ." Art. I, § 7, cl. 2. (Emphasis added).

68

" _Every_ Order, Resolution, or Vote to which the Concurrence of the Senate
and House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of
Adjournment) _shall be_ presented to the President of the United States; and
before the Same shall take Effect, _shall be_ approved by him, or being
disapproved by him, _shall be_ repassed by two thirds of the Senate and House
of Representatives, according to the Rules and Limitations prescribed in the
Case of a Bill." Art. I, § 7, cl. 3. (Emphasis added).

69

These provisions of Art. I are integral parts of the constitutional design for
the separation of powers. We have recently noted that "[t]he principle of
separation of powers was not simply an abstract generalization in the minds of
the Framers: it was woven into the documents that they drafted in Philadelphia
in the summer of 1787." _Buckley v. Valeo, supra,_ 424 U.S., at 124, 96 S.Ct.,
at 684. Just as we relied on the textual provision of Art. II, § 2, cl. 2, to
vindicate the principle of separation of powers in _Buckley,_ we find that the
purposes underlying the Presentment Clauses, Art. I, § 7, cls. 2, 3, and the
bicameral requirement of Art. I, § 1 and § 7, cl. 2, guide our resolution of
the important question presented in this case. The very structure of the
articles delegating and separating powers under Arts. I, II, and III exemplify
the concept of separation of powers and we now turn to Art. I.

B

The Presentment Clauses

70

The records of the Constitutional Convention reveal that the requirement that
all legislation be presented to the President before becoming law was
uniformly accepted by the Framers.14 Presentment to the President and the
Presidential veto were considered so imperative that the draftsmen took
special pains to assure that these requirements could not be circumvented.
During the final debate on Art. I, § 7, cl. 2, James Madison expressed concern
that it might easily be evaded by the simple expedient of calling a proposed
law a "resolution" or "vote" rather than a "bill." 2 M. Farrand, The Records
of the Federal Convention of 1787 301-302. As a consequence, Art. I, § 7, cl.
3, _ante,_ at 945-946, was added. _Id.,_ at 304-305.

71

The decision to provide the President with a limited and qualified power to
nullify proposed legislation by veto was based on the profound conviction of
the Framers that the powers conferred on Congress were the powers to be most
carefully circumscribed. It is beyond doubt that lawmaking was a power to be
shared by both Houses and the President. In The Federalist No. 73 (H. Lodge
ed. 1888), Hamilton focused on the President's role in making laws:

72

"If even no propensity had ever discovered itself in the legislative body to
invade the rights of the Executive, the rules of just reasoning and theoretic
propriety would of themselves teach us that the one ought not to be left to
the mercy of the other, but ought to possess a constitutional and effectual
power of self-defense." _Id.,_ at 457-458.

73

See also The Federalist No. 51. In his Commentaries on the Constitution,
Joseph Story makes the same point. 1 J. Story, Commentaries on the
Constitution of the United States 614-615 (1858).

74

The President's role in the lawmaking process also reflects the Framers'
careful efforts to check whatever propensity a particular Congress might have
to enact oppressive, improvident, or ill-considered measures. The President's
veto role in the legislative process was described later during public debate
on ratification:

75

"It establishes a salutary check upon the legislative body, calculated to
guard the community against the effects of faction, precipitancy, or of any
impulse unfriendly to the public good which may happen to influence a majority
of that body. . . . The primary inducement to conferring the power in question
upon the Executive is to enable him to defend himself; the secondary one is to
increase the chances in favor of the community against the passing of bad laws
through haste, inadvertence, or design." The Federalist No. 73, _supra,_ at
458 (A. Hamilton).

76

See also _The Pocket Veto Case,_ 279 U.S. 655, 678, 49 S.Ct. 463, 466, 73
L.Ed. 894 (1929); _Myers v. United States,_ 272 U.S. 52, 123, 47 S.Ct. 21, 27,
71 L.Ed. 160 (1926). The Court also has observed that the Presentment Clauses
serve the important purpose of assuring that a "national" perspective is
grafted on the legislative process:

77

"The President is a representative of the people just as the members of the
Senate and of the House are, and it may be, at some times, on some subjects,
that the President elected by all the people is rather more representative of
them all than are the members of either body of the Legislature whose
constituencies are local and not countrywide. . . ." _Myers v. United States,
supra,_ 272 U.S., at 123, 47 S.Ct., at 27.

C

Bicameralism

78

The bicameral requirement of Art. I, §§ 1, 7 was of scarcely less concern to
the Framers than was the Presidential veto and indeed the two concepts are
interdependent. By providing that no law could take effect without the
concurrence of the prescribed majority of the Members of both Houses, the
Framers reemphasized their belief, already remarked upon in connection with
the Presentment Clauses, that legislation should not be enacted unless it has
been carefully and fully considered by the Nation's elected officials. In the
Constitutional Convention debates on the need for a bicameral legislature,
James Wilson, later to become a Justice of this Court, commented:

79

"Despotism comes on mankind in different shapes. Sometimes in an Execu ive,
sometimes in a military, one. Is there danger of a Legislative despotism?
Theory & practice both proclaim it. If the Legislative authority be not
restrained, there can be neither liberty nor stability; and it can only be
restrained by dividing it within itself, into distinct and independent
branches. In a single house there is no check, but the inadequate one, of the
virtue & good sense of those who compose it." 1 M. Farrand, _supra,_ at 254.

80

Hamilton argued that a Congress comprised of a single House was antithetical
to the very purposes of the Constitution. Were the Nation to adopt a
Constitution providing for only one legislative organ, he warned:

81

"we shall finally accumulate, in a single body, all the most important
prerogatives of sovereignty, and thus entail upon our posterity one of the
most execrable forms of government that human infatuation ever contrived. Thus
we should create in reality that very tyranny which the adversaries of the new
Constitution either are, or affect to be, solicitous to avert." The Federalist
No. 22, _supra,_ at 135.

82

This view was rooted in a general skepticism regarding the fallibility of
human nature later commented on by Joseph Story:

83

"Public bodies, like private persons, are occasionally under the dominion of
strong passions and excitements; impatient, irritable, and impetuous. . . . If
[a legislature]

84

feels no check but its own will, it rarely has the firmness to insist upon
holding a question long enough under its own view, to see and mark it in all
its bearings and relations to society." 1 J. Story, _supra,_ at 383-384.

85

These observations are consistent with what many of the Framers expressed,
none more cogently than Hamilton in pointing up the need to divide and
disperse power in order to protect liberty:

86

"In republican government, the legislative authority necessarily predominates.
The remedy for this inconveniency is to divide the legislature into different
branches; and to render them, by different modes of election and different
principles of action, as little connected with each other as the nature of
their common functions and their common dependence on the society will admit."
The Federalist No. 51, _supra,_ at 324.

87

See also The Federalist No. 62.

88

However familiar, it is useful to recall that apart from their fear that
special interests could be favored at the expense of public needs, the Framers
were also concerned, although not of one mind, over the apprehensions of the
smaller states. Those states feared a commonality of interest among the larger
states would work to their disadvantage; representatives of the larger states,
on the other hand, were skeptical of a legislature that could pass laws
favoring a minority of the people. See 1 M. Farrand, _supra,_ 176-177,
484-491. It need hardly be repeated here that the Great Compromise, under
which one House was viewed as representing the people and the other the
states, allayed the fears of both the large and small states.15

89

We see therefore that the Framers were acutely conscious that the bicameral
requirement and the Presentment Clauses would serve essential constitutional
functions. The President's participation in the legislative process was to
protect the Executive Branch from Congress and to protect the whole people
from improvident laws. The division of the Congress into two distinctive
bodies assures that the legislative power would be exercised only after
opportunity for full study and debate in separate settings. The President's
unilateral veto power, in turn, was limited by the power of two thirds of both
Houses of Congress to overrule a veto thereby precluding final arbitrary
action of one person. See 1 M Farrand, _supra,_ at 99-104. It emerges clearly
that the prescription for legislative action in Art. I, §§ 1, 7 represents the
Framers' decision that the legislative power of the Federal government be
exercised in accord with a single, finely wrought and exhaustively considered,
procedure.

IV

90

The Constitution sought to divide the delegated powers of the new federal
government into three defined categories, legislative, executive and judicial,
to assure, as nearly as possible, that each Branch of government would confine
itself to its assigned responsibility. The hydraulic pressure inherent within
each of the separate Branches to exceed the outer limits of its power, even to
accomplish desirable objectives, must be resisted.

91

Although not "hermetically" sealed from one another, _Buckley v. Valeo,
supra,_ 424 U.S., at 121, 96 S.Ct., at 683, the powers delegated to the three
Branches are functionally identifiable. When any Branch acts, it is
presumptively exercising the power the Constitution has delegated to it. See
_Hampton & Co. v. United States,_ 276 U.S. 394, 406, 48 S.Ct. 348, 351, 72
L.Ed. 624 (1928). When the Executive acts, it presumptively acts in an
executive or administrative capacity as defined in Art. II. And when, as here,
one House of Congress purports to act, it is presumptively acting within its
assigned sphere.

92

Beginning with this presumption, we must nevertheless establish that the
challenged action under § 244(c)(2) is of the kind to which the procedural
requirements of Art. I, § 7 apply. Not every action taken by either House is
subject to the bicameralism and presentment requirements of Art. I. See
_post,_ at 955. Whether actions taken by either House are, in law and fact, an
exercise of legislative power depends not on their form but upon "whether they
contain matter which is properly to be regarded as legislative in its
character and effect." S.Rep. No. 1335, 54th Cong., 2d Sess., 8 (1897).

93

Examination of the action taken here by one House pursuant to § 244(c)(2)
reveals that it was essentially legislative in purpose and effect. In
purporting to exercise power defined in Art. I, § 8, cl. 4 to "establish an
uniform Rule of Naturalization," the House took action that had the purpose
and effect of altering the legal rights, duties and relations of persons,
including the Attorney General, Executive Branch officials and Chadha, all
outside the legislative branch. Section 244(c)(2) purports to authorize one
House of Congress to require the Attorney General to deport an individual
alien whose deportation otherwise would be cancelled under § 244\. The one-
House veto operated in this case to overrule the Attorney General and mandate
Chadha's deportation; absent the House action, Chadha would remain in the
United States. Congress has _acted_ and its action has altered Chadha's
status.

94

The legislative character of the one-House veto in this case is confirmed by
the character of the Congressional action it supplants. Neither the House of
Representatives nor the Senate contends that, absent the veto provision in §
244(c)(2), either of them, or both of them acting together, could effectively
require the Attorney General to deport an alien once the Attorney General, in
the exercise of legislatively delegated authority,16 had determined the alien
should remain in the United States. Without the challenged provision in §
244(c)(2), this could have been achieved, if at all, only by legislation
requiring deportation.17 Similarly, a veto by one House of Congress under §
244(c)(2) cannot be justified as an attempt at amending the standards set out
in § 244(a)(1), or as a repeal of § 244 as applied to Chadha. Amendment and
repeal of statutes, no less than enactment, must conform with Art. I.18

95

The nature of the decision implemented by the one-House veto in this case
further manifests its legislative character. After long experience with the
clumsy, time consuming private bill procedure, Congress made a deliberate
choice to delegate to the Executive Branch, and specifically to the Attorney
General, the authority to allow deportable aliens to remain in this country in
certain specified circumstances. It is not disputed that this choice to
delegate authority is precisely the kind of decision that can be implemented
only in accordance with the procedures set out in Art. I. Disagreement with
the Attorney General's decision on Chadha's deportation--that is, Congress'
decision to deport Chadha--no less than Congress' original choice to delegate
to the Attorney General the authority to make that decision, involves
determinations of policy that Congress can implement in only one way;
bicameral passage followed by presentment to the President. Congress must
abide by its delegation of authority until that delegation is legislatively
altered or revoked.19

96

Finally, we see that when the Framers intended to authorize either House of
Congress to act alone and outside of its prescribed bicameral legislative
role, they narrowly and precisely defined the procedure for such action. There
are but four provisions in the Constitution, explicit and unambiguous, by
which one House may act alone with the unreviewable force of law, not subject
to the President's veto:

97

(a) The House of Representatives alone was given the power to initiate
impeachments. Art. I, § 2, cl. 6;

98

(b) The Senate alone was given the power to conduct trials following
impeachment on charges initiated by the House and to convict following trial.
Art. I, § 3, cl. 5;

99

(c) The Senate alone was given final unreviewable power to approve or to
disapprove presidential appointments. Art. II, § 2, cl. 2;

100

(d) The Senate alone was given unreviewable power to ratify treaties
negotiated by the President. Art. II, § 2, cl. 2.

101

Clearly, when the Draftsmen sought to confer special powers on one House,
independent of the other House, or of the President, they did so in explicit,
unambiguous terms.20 These carefully defined exceptions from presentment and
bicameralism underscore the difference between the legislative functions of
Congress and other unilateral but important and binding one-House acts
provided for in the Constitution. These exceptions are narrow, explicit, and
separately justified; none of them authorize the action challenged here. On
the contrary, they provide further support for the conclusion that
Congressional authority is not to be implied and for the conclusion that the
veto provided for in § 244(c)(2) is not authorized by the constitutional
design of the powers of the Legislative Branch.

102

Since it is clear that the action by the House under § 244(c)(2) was not
within any of the express constitutional exceptions authorizing one House to
act alone, and equally clear that it was an exercise of legislative power,
that action was subject to the standards prescribed in Article I.21 The
bicameral requirement, the Presentment Clauses, the President's veto, and
Congress' power to override a veto were intended to erect enduring checks on
each Branch and to protect the people from the improvident exercise of power
by mandating certain prescribed steps. To preserve those checks, and maintain
the separation of powers, the carefully defined limits on the power of each
Branch must not be eroded. To accomplish what has been attempted by one House
of Congress in this case requires action in conformity with the express
procedures of the Constitution's prescription for legislative action: passage
by a majority of both Houses and presentment to the President.22

103

The veto authorized by § 244(c)(2) doubtless has been in many respects a
convenient shortcut; the "sharing" with the Executive by Congress of its
authority over aliens in this manner is, on its face, an appealing compromise.
In purely practical terms, it is obviously easier for action to be taken by
one House without submission to the President; but it is crystal clear from
the records of the Convention, contemporaneous writings and debates, that the
Framers ranked other values higher than efficiency. The records of the
Convention and debates in the States preceding ratification underscore the
common desire to define and limit the exercise of the newly created federal
powers affecting the states and the people. There is unmistakable expression
of a determination that legislation by the national Congress be a step-by-
step, deliberate and deliberative process.

104

The choices we discern § having been made in the Constitutional Convention
impose burdens on governmental processes that often seem clumsy, inefficient,
even unworkable, but those hard choices were consciously made by men who had
lived under a form of government that permitted arbitrary governmental acts to
go unchecked. There is no support in the Constitution or decisions of this
Court for the proposition that the cumbersomeness and delays often encountered
in complying with explicit Constitutional standards may be avoided, either by
the Congress or by the President. See _Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,_
343 U.S. 579, 72 S.Ct. 863, 96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952). With all the obvious flaws
of delay, untidiness, and potential for abuse, we have not yet found a better
way to preserve freedom than by making the exercise of power subject to the
carefully crafted restraints spelled out in the Constitution.

V

105

We hold that the Congressional veto provision in § 244(c)(2) is severable from
the Act and that it is unconstitutional. Accordingly, the judgment of the
Court of Appeals is

106

_Affirmed._

107

Justice POWELL, concurring in the judgment.

108

The Court's decision, based on the Presentment Clauses, Art. I, § 7, cls. 2
and 3, apparently will invalidate every use of the legislative veto. The
breadth of this holding gives one pause. Congress has included the veto in
literally hundreds of statutes, dating back to the 1930s. Congress clearly
views this procedure as essential to controlling the delegation of power to
administrative agencies.1 One reasonably may disagree with Congress'
assessment of the veto's utility,2 but the respect due its judgment as a
coordinate branch of Government cautions that our holding should be no more
extensive than necessary to decide this case. In my view, the case may be
decided on a narrower ground. When Congress finds that a particular person
does not satisfy the statutory criteria for permanent residence in this
country it has assumed a judicial function in violation of the principle of
separation of powers. Accordingly, I concur only in the judgment.

109

* A.

110

The Framers perceived that "[t]he accumulation of all powers legislative,
executive and judiciary in the same hands, whether of one, a few or many, and
whether hereditary, self appointed, or elective, may justly be pronounced the
very definition of tyranny." The Federalist No. 47, p. 324 (J. Cooke ed. 1961)
(J. Madison). Theirs was not a baseless fear. Under British rule, the colonies
suffered the abuses of unchecked executive power that were attributed, at
least popularly, to an hereditary monarchy. See Levi, Some Aspects of
Separation of Powers, 76 Colum.L.Rev. 369, 374 (1976); The Federalist No. 48.
During the Confederation, the States reacted by removing power from the
executive and placing it in the hands of elected legislators. But many
legislators proved to be little better than the Crown. "The supremacy of
legislatures came to be recognized as the supremacy of faction and the tyranny
of shifting majorities. The legislatures confiscated property, erected paper
money schemes, [and] suspended the ordinary means of collecting debts." Levi,
76 Colum.L.Rev., at 374-375.

111

One abuse that was prevalent during the Confederation was the exercis of
judicial power by the state legislatures. The Framers were well acquainted
with the danger of subjecting the determination of the rights of one person to
the "tyranny of shifting majorities." Jefferson observed that members of the
General Assembly in his native Virginia had not been prevented from assuming
judicial power, and " '[t]hey have accordingly _in many_ instances _decided
rights_ which should have been left to _judiciary controversy._ ' "3 The
Federalist No. 48, p. 336 (J. Cooke ed. 1961) (emphasis in original) (quoting
T. Jefferson, Notes on the State of Virginia 196 (London edition 1787)). The
same concern also was evident in the reports of the Council of the Censors, a
body that was charged with determining whether the Pennsylvania Legislature
had complied with the state constitution. The Council found that during this
period "[t]he constitutional trial by jury had been violated; and powers
assumed, which had not been delegated by the Constitution. . . . [C]ases
belonging to the judiciary department, frequently [had been] drawn within
legislative cognizance and determination." _Id.,_ at 336-337.

112

It was to prevent the recurrence of such abuses that the Framers vested the
executive, legislative, and judicial powers in separate branches. Their
concern that a legislature should not be able unilaterally to impose a
substantial deprivation on one person was expressed not only in this general
allocation of power, but also in more specific provisions, such as the Bill of
Attainder Clause, Art. I, § 9, cl. 3. As the Court recognized in _United
States v. Brown,_ 381 U.S. 437, 442, 85 S.Ct. 1707, 1711, 14 L.Ed.2d 484
(1965), "the Bill of Attainder Clause was intended not as a narrow, technical
. . . prohibition, but rather as an implementation of the separation of
powers, a general safeguard against legislative exercise of the judicial
function, or more simply--trial by legislature." This Clause, and the
separation of powers doctrine generally, reflect the Framers' concern that
trial by a legislature lacks the safeguards necessary to prevent the abuse of
power.

B

113

The Constitution does not establish three branches with precisely defined
boundaries. See _Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 121, 96 S.Ct. 612, 683, 46
L.Ed.2d 659 (1976) ( _per curiam_ ). Rather, as Justice Jackson wrote,
"[w]hile the Constitution diffuses power the better to secure liberty, it also
contemplates that practice will integrate the dispersed powers into a workable
government. It enjoins upon its branches separateness but interdependence,
autonomy but reciprocity." _Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,_ 343 U.S.
579, 635, 72 S.Ct. 863, 870, 96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952) (concurring opinion). The
Court thus has been mindful that the boundaries between each branch should be
fixed "according to common sense and the inherent necessities of the
governmental co-ordination." _J.W. Hampton, Jr. & Co. v. United States,_ 276
U.S. 394, 406, 48 S.Ct. 348, 351, 72 L.Ed. 624 (1928). But where one branch
has impaired or sought to assume a power central to another branch, the Court
has not hesitated to enforce the doctrine. See _Buckley v. Valeo, supra,_ 424
U.S., at 123, 96 S.Ct., at 684.

114

Functionally, the doctrine may be violated in two ways. One branch may
interfere impermissibly with the other's performance of its constitutionally
assigned function. See _Nixon v. Administrator of General Services,_ 433 U.S.
425, 433, 97 S.Ct. 2777, 2785, 53 L.Ed.2d 867 (1977); _United States v.
Nixon,_ 418 U.S. 683, 94 S.Ct. 3090, 41 L.Ed.2d 1039 (1974). Alternatively,
the doctrine may be violated when one branch assumes a function that more
properly is entrusted to another. See _Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,
supra,_ 343 U.S., at 587, 72 S.Ct., at 866-867 (1952); _Springer v. Philippine
Islands,_ 277 U.S. 189, 203, 48 S.Ct. 480, 482-483, 72 L.Ed. 845 (1928). This
case presents the latter situation.4

II

115

Before considering whether Congress impermissibly assumed a judicial function,
it is helpful to recount briefly Congress' actions. Jagdish Rai Chadha, a
citizen of Kenya, stayed in this country after his student visa expired.
Although he was scheduled to be deported, he requested the Immigration and
Naturalization Service to suspend his deportation because he met the statutory
criteria for permanent residence in this country. After a hearing,5 the
Service granted Chadha's request and sent--as required by the reservation of
the veto right--a report of its action to Congress.

116

In addition to the report on Chadha, Congress had before it the names of 339
other persons whose deportations also had been suspended by the Service. The
House Committee on the Judiciary decided that six of these persons, including
Chadha, should not be allowed to remain in this country. Accordingly, it
submitted a resolution to the House, which stated simply that "the House of
Representatives does not approve the granting of permanent residence in the
United States to the aliens hereinafter named." 121 Cong.Rec. 40800 (1975).
The resolution was not distributed prior to the vote,6 but the Chairman of the
Judiciary Committee explained to the House:

117

"It was the feeling of the committee, after reviewing 340 cases, that the
aliens contained in the resolution did not meet [the] statutory requirements,
particularly as it relates to hardship; and it is the opinion of the committee
that their deportation should not be suspended." _I id._ (remarks of Rep.
Eilberg).

118

Without further explanation and without a recorded vote, the House rejected
the Service's determination that these six people met the statutory criteria.

119

On its face, the House's action appears clearly adjudicatory.7 The House did
not enact a general rule; rather it made its own determination that six
specific persons did not comply with certain statutory criteria. It thus
undertook the type of decision that traditionally has been left to other
branches. Even if the House did not make a _de novo_ determination, but simply
reviewed the Immigration and Naturalization Service's findings, it still
assumed a function ordinarily entrusted to the federal courts.8 See 5 U.S.C. §
704 (providing generally for judicial review of final agency action); cf.
_Foti v. INS,_ 375 U.S. 217, 84 S.Ct. 306, 11 L.Ed.2d 281 (1963) (holding that
courts of appeals have jurisdiction to review INS decisions denying suspension
of deportation). Where, as here, Congress has exercised a power "that cannot
possibly be regarded as merely in aid of the legislative function of
Congress," _Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S., at 138, 96 S.Ct., at 691, the
decisions of this Court have held that Congress impermissibly assumed a
function that the Constitution entrusted to another branch, see _id.,_ at
138-141, 96 S.Ct., at 691-693; cf. _Springer v. Philippine Islands,_ 277 U.S.,
at 202, 48 S.Ct., at 482.

120

The impropriety of the House's assumption of this function is confirmed by the
fact that its action raises the very danger the Framers sought to avoid--the
exercise of unchecked power. In deciding whether Chadha deserves to be
deported, Congress is not subject to any internal constraints that prevent it
from arbitrarily depriving him of the right to remain in this country.9 Unlike
the judiciary or an administrative agency, Congress is not bound by
established substantive rules. Nor is it subject to the procedural safeguards,
such as the right to counsel and a hearing before an impartial tribunal, that
are present when a court or an agency10 adjudicates individual rights. The
only effective constraint on Congress' power is political, but Congress is
most accountable politically when it prescribes rules of general
applicability. When it decides rights of specific persons, those rights are
subject to "the tyranny of a shifting majority." Chief Justice Marshall
observed: "It is the peculiar province of the legislature to prescribe general
rules for the government of society; the application of those rules would seem
to be the duty of other departments." _Fletcher v. Peck,_ 6 Cranch 87, 136, 3
L.Ed. 162 (1810). In my view, when Congress undertook to apply its rules to
Chadha, it exceeded the scope of its constitutionally prescribed authority. I
would not reach the broader question whether legislative vetoes are invalid
under the Presentment Clauses.

121

Justice WHITE, dissenting.

122

Today the Court not only invalidates § 244(c)(2) of the Immigration and
Nationality Act, but also sounds the death knell for nearly 200 other
statutory provisions in which Congress has reserved a "legislative veto." For
this reason, the Court's decision is of surpassing importance. And it is for
this reason that the Court would have been well-advised to decide the case, if
possible, on the narrower grounds of separation of powers, leaving for full
consideration the constitutionality of other congressional review statutes
operating on such varied matters as war powers and agency rulemaking, some of
which concern the independent regulatory agencies.1

123

The prominence of the legislative veto mechanism in our contemporary political
system and its importance to Congress can hardly be overstated. It has become
a central means by which Congress secures the accountability of executive and
independent agencies. Without the legislative veto, Congress is faced with a
Hobson's choice: either to refrain from delegating the necessary authority,
leaving itself with a hopeless task of writing laws with the requisite
specificity to cover endless special circumstances across the entire policy
landscape, or in the alternative, to abdicate its law-making function to the
executive branch and independent agencies. To choose the former leaves major
national problems unresolved; to opt for the latter risks unaccountable
policymaking by those not elected to fill that role. Accordingly, over the
past five decades, the legislative veto has been placed in nearly 200
statutes.2 The device is known in every field of governmental concern:
reorganization, budgets, foreign affairs, war powers, and regulation of trade,
safety, energy, the environment and the economy.

124

* The legislative veto developed initially in response to the problems of reorganizing the sprawling government structure created in response to the Depression. The Reorganization Acts established the chief model for the legislative veto. When President Hoover requested authority to reorganize the government in 1929, he coupled his request that the "Congress be willing to delegate its authority over the problem (subject to defined principles) to the Executive" with a proposal for legislative review. He proposed that the Executive "should act upon approval of a joint committee of Congress or with the reservation of power of revision by Congress within some limited period adequate for its consideration." Pub.Papers 432 (1929). Congress followed President Hoover's suggestion and authorized reorganization subject to legislative review. Act of June 30, 1932, ch. 314, § 407, 47 Stat. 382, 414. Although the reorganization authority reenacted in 1933 did not contain a legislative veto provision, the provision returned during the Roosevelt Administration and has since been renewed numerous times. Over the years, the provision was used extensively. Presidents submitted 115 reorganization plans to Congress of which 23 were disapproved by Congress pursuant to legislative veto provisions. See Brief of U.S. Senate on Reargument, App. A.

125

Shortly after adoption of the Reorganization Act of 1939, 54 Stat. 561,
Congress and the President applied the legislative veto procedure to resolve
the delegation problem for national security and foreign affairs. World War II
occasioned the need to transfer greater authority to the President in these
areas. The legislative veto offered the means by which Congress could confer
additional authority while preserving its own constitutional role. During
World War II, Congress enacted over thirty statutes conferring powers on the
Executive with legislative veto provisions.3 President Roosevelt accepted the
veto as the necessary price for obtaining exceptional authority.4

126

Over the quarter century following World War II, Presidents continued to
accept legislative vetoes by one or both Houses as constitutional, while
regularly denouncing provisions by which Congressional committees reviewed
Executive activity.5 The legislative veto balanced delegations of statutor
authority in new areas of governmental involvement: the space program,
international agreements on nuclear energy, tariff arrangements, and
adjustment of federal pay rates.6

127

During the 1970's the legislative veto was important in resolving a series of
major constitutional disputes between the President and Congress over claims
of the President to broad impoundment, war, and national emergency powers. The
key provision of the War Powers Resolution, 50 U.S.C. § 1544(c), authorizes
the termination by concurrent resolution of the use of armed forces in
hostilities. A similar measure resolved the problem posed by Presidential
claims of inherent power to impound appropriations. Congressional Budget and
Impoundment Control Act of 1974, 31 U.S.C. § 1403\. In conference, a
compromise was achieved under which permanent impoundments, termed
"rescissions," would require approval through enactment of legislation. In
contrast, temporary impoundments, or "deferrals," would become effective
unless disapproved by one House. This compromise provided the President with
flexibility, while preserving ultimate Congressional control over the budget.7
Although the War Powers Resolution was enacted over President Nixon's veto,
the Impoundment Control Act was enacted with the President's approval. These
statutes were followed by others resolving similar problems: the National
Emergencies Act, § 202, 90 Stat. 1255, 50 U.S.C. § 1622 (1976), resolving the
longstanding problems with unchecked Executive emergency power; the Arms
Export Control Act, § 211, 90 Stat. 729, 22 U.S.C. § 2776(b) (1976), resolving
the problem o foreign arms sales; and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act of
1978, §§ 303, 304(a), 306, 307, 401, 92 Stat. 120, 130, 134, 137, 139,
144-145, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2160(f), 2155(b), 2157(b), 2158, 2153(d) (Supp. IV.
1980), resolving the problem of exports of nuclear technology.

128

In the energy field, the legislative veto served to balance broad delegations
in legislation emerging from the energy crisis of the 1970's.8 In the
educational field, it was found that fragmented and narrow grant programs
"inevitably lead to Executive-Legislative confrontations" because they inaptly
limited the Commissioner of Education's authority. S.Rep. No. 763, 93d Cong.,
2d Sess. 69 (1974). The response was to grant the Commissioner of Education
rulemaking authority, subject to a legislative veto. In the trade regulation
area, the veto preserved Congressional authority over the Federal Trade
Commission's broad mandate to make rules to prevent businesses from engaging
in "unfair or deceptive acts or practices in commerce."9

129

Even this brief review suffices to demonstrate that the legislative veto is
more than "efficient, convenient, and useful." _Ante,_ at 944. It is an
important if not indispensable political invention that allows the President
and Congress to resolve major constitutional and policy differences, assures
the accountability of independent regulatory agencies, and preserves Congress'
control over lawmaking. Perhaps there are other means of accommodation and
accountability, but the increasing reliance of Congress upon the legislative
veto suggests that the alternatives to which Congress must now turn are not
entirely satisfactory.10

130

The history of the legislative veto also makes clear that it has not been a
sword with which Congress has struck out to aggrandize itself at the expense
of the other branches--the concerns of Madison and Hamilton. Rather, the veto
has been a means of defense, a reservation of ultimate authority necessary if
Congress is to fulfill its designated role under Article I as the nation's
lawmaker. While the President has often objected to particular legislative
vetoes, generally those left in the hands of congressional committees, the
Executive has more often agreed to legislative review as the price for a broad
delegation of authority. To be sure, the President may have preferred
unrestricted power, but that could be precisely why Congress thought it
essential to retain a check on the exercise of delegated authority.

II

131

For all these reasons, the apparent sweep of the Court's decision today is
regretable. The Court's Article I analysis appears to invalidate all
legislative vetoes irrespective of form or subject. Because the legislative
veto is commonly found as a check upon rulemaking by administrative agencies
and upon broad-based policy decisions of the Executive Branch, it is
particularly unfortunate that the Court reaches its decision in a case
involving the exercise of a veto over deportation decisions regarding
particular individuals. Co rts should always be wary of striking statutes as
unconstitutional; to strike an entire class of statutes based on consideration
of a somewhat atypical and more-readily indictable exemplar of the class is
irresponsible. It was for cases such as this one that Justice Brandeis wrote:

132

"The Court has frequently called attention to the 'great gravity and delicacy'
of its function in passing upon the validity of an act of Congress. . . .

133

The Court will not 'formulate a rule of constitutional law broader than is
required by the precise facts to which it is to be applied.' _Liverpool, N.Y.
& P.S.S. Co. v. Emigration Commissioners, supra_ [113 U.S. 33, 5 S.Ct. 352, 28
L.Ed. 899]." _Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley Authority,_ 297 U.S. 288, 347, 56
S.Ct. 466, 483, 80 L.Ed. 688 (1936) (concurring opinion).

134

Unfortunately, today's holding is not so limited.11

135

If the legislativ veto were as plainly unconstitutional as the Court strives
to suggest, its broad ruling today would be more comprehensible. But, the
constitutionality of the legislative veto is anything but clearcut. The issue
divides scholars,12 courts,13 attorneys general,14 and the two other branches
of the National Government. If the veto devices so flagrantly disregarded the
requirements of Article I as the Court today suggests, I find it
incomprehensible that Congress, whose members are bound by oath to uphold the
Constitution, would have placed these mechanisms in nearly 200 separate laws
over a period of 50 years.

136

The reality of the situation is that the constitutional question posed today
is one of immense difficulty over which the executive and legislative branches
--as well as scholars and judges have understandably disagreed. That
disagreement stems from the silence of the Constitution on the precise
question: The Constitution does not directly authorize or prohibit the
legislative veto. Thus, our task should be to determine whether the
legislative veto is consistent with the purposes of Art. I and the principles
of Separation of Powers which are reflected in that Article and throughout the
Constitution.15 We should not find the lack of a specific constitutional
authorization for the legislative veto surprising, and I would not infer
disapproval of the mechanism from its absence. From the summer of 1787 to the
present the government of the United States has become an endeavor far beyond
the contemplation of the Framers. Only within the last half century has the
complexity and size of the Federal Government's responsibilities grown so
greatly that the Congress must rely on the legislative veto as the most
effective if not the only means to insure their role as the nation's
lawmakers. But the wisdom of the Framers was to anticipate that the nation
would grow and new problems of governance would require different solutions.
Accordingly, our Federal Government was intentionally chartered with the
flexibility to respond to contemporary needs without losing sight of
fundamental democratic principles. This was the spirit in which Justice
Jackson penned his influential concurrence in the _Steel Seizure Case:_

137

"The actual art of governing under our Constitution does not and cannot
conform to judicial definitions of the power of any of its branches based on
isolated clauses or even single Articles torn from context. While the
Constitution diffuses power the better to secure liberty, it also contemplates
that practice will integrate the dispersed powers into a workable government."
_Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,_ 343 U.S. 579, 635, 72 S.Ct. 863, 870,
96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952).

138

This is the perspective from which we should approach the novel constitutional
questions presented by the legislative veto. In my view, neither Article I of
the Constitution nor the doctrine of separation of powers is violated by this
mechanism by which our elected representatives preserve their voice in the
governance of the nation.

III

139

The Court holds that the disapproval of a suspension of deportation by the
resolution of one House of Congress is an exercise of legislative power
without compliance with the prerequisites for lawmaking set forth in Art. I of
the Constitution. Specifically, the Court maintains that the provisions of §
244(c)(2) are inconsistent with the requirement of bicameral approval,
implicit in Art. I, § 1, and the requirement that all bills and resolutions
that require the concurrence of both Houses be presented to the President,
Art. I, § 7, cl. 2 and 3.16

140

I do not dispute the Court's truismatic exposition of these clauses. There is
no question that a bill does not become a law until it is approved by both the
House and the Senate, and presented to the President. Similarly, I would not
hesitate to strike an action of Congress in the form of a concurrent
resolution which constituted an exercise of original lawmaking authority. I
agree with the Court that the President's qualified veto power is a critical
element in the distribution of powers under the Constitution, widely endorsed
among the Framers, and intended to serve the President as a defense against
legislative encroachment and to check the "passing of bad laws through haste,
inadvertence, or design." The Federalist No. 73, at 458 (A. Hamilton). The
records of the Convention reveal that it is the first purpose which figured
most prominently but I acknowledge the vitality of the second. _Id.,_ at 443.
I also agree that the bicameral approval required by Art. I, §§ 1, 7 "was of
scarcely less concern to the Framers than was the Presidential veto," _ante,_
at 948, and that the need to divide and disperse legislative power figures
significantly in our scheme of Government. All of this, the Third Part of the
Court's opinion, is entirely unexceptionable.

141

It does not, however, answer the constitutional question before us. The power
to exercise a legislative veto is not the power to write new law without
bicameral approval or presidential consideration. The veto must be authorized
by statute and may only negative what an Executive department or independent
agency has proposed. On its face, the legislative veto no more allows one
House of Congress to make law than does the presidential veto confer such
power upon the President. Accordingly, the Court properly recognizes that it
"must establish that the challenged action under § 244(c)(2) is of the kind to
which the procedural requirements of Art. I, § 7 apply" and admits that "not
every action taken by either House is subject to the bicameralism and
presentation requirements of Art. I." _Ante,_ at 952.

A.

142

The terms of the Presentment Clauses suggest only that bills and their
equivalent are subject to the requirements of bicameral passage and
presentment to the President. Article I, § 7, cl. 2, stipulates only that
"Every Bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the
Senate, shall before it becomes a Law, be presented to the President" for
approval or disapproval, his disapproval then subject to being overridden by a
two-thirds vote of both houses. Section 7, cl. 3 goes further:

143

"Every Order, Resolution, or Vote to which the Concurrence of the Senate and
House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of
Adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the United States; and
before the same shall take Effect, shall be approved by him, or being
disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two-thirds of the Senate and House of
Representatives, according to the Rules and Limitations prescribed in the Case
of a Bill."

144

Although the Clause does not specify the actions for which the concurrence of
both ouses is "necessary," the proceedings at the Philadelphia Convention
suggest its purpose was to prevent Congress from circumventing the
presentation requirement in the making of new legislation. James Madison
observed that if the President's veto was confined to bills, it could be
evaded by calling a proposed law a "resolution" or "vote" rather than a
"bill." Accordingly, he proposed that "or resolve" should be added after
"bill" in what is now clause 2 of § 7\. 2 M. Farrand, _The Records of the
Federal Convention of 1787_ 301-302. After a short discussion on the subject,
the amendment was rejected. On the following day, however, Randolph renewed
the proposal in the substantial form as it now appears, and the motion passed.
_Id.,_ at 304-305; 5 Elliot's Debates 431 (1845). The chosen language,
Madison's comment, and the brevity of the Convention's consideration, all
suggest a modest role was intended for the Clause and no broad restraint on
Congressional authority was contemplated. See Stewart, Constitutionality of
the Legislative Veto, 13 Harv.J.Legis. 593, 609-611 (1976). This reading is
consistent with the historical background of the Presentation Clause itself
which reveals only that the Framers were concerned with limiting the methods
for enacting new legislation. The Framers were aware of the experience in
Pennsylvania where the legislature had evaded the requirements attached to the
passing of legislation by the use of "resolves," and the criticisms directed
at this practice by the Council of Censors.17 There is no record that the
Convention contemplated, let alone intended, that these Article I requirements
would someday be invoked to restrain the scope of Congressional authority
pursuant to duly-enacted law.18

145

When the Convention did turn its attention to the scope of Congress' lawmaking
power, the Framers were expansive. The Necessary and Proper Clause, Art. I, §
8, cl. 18, vests Congress with the power "to make all laws which shall be
necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers [the
enumerated powers of § 8], and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in
the government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof."
It is long-settled that Congress may "exercise its best judgment in the
selection of measures, to carry into execution the constitutional powers of
the government," and "avail itself of experience, to exercise its reason, and
to accommodate its legislation to circumstances." _McCulloch v. Maryland,_ 4
Wheat. 316, 415-416, 420, 4 L.Ed. 579 (1819).

B

146

The Court heeded this counsel in approving the modern administrative state.
The Court's holding today that all legislative-type action must be enacted
through the lawmaking process ignores that legislative authority is routinely
delegated to the Executive branch, to the independent regulatory agencies, and
to private individuals and groups.

147

"The rise of administrative bodies probably has been the most significant
legal trend of the last century. . . . They have become a veritable fourth
branch of the Government, which has deranged our three-branch legal theories .
. ." _Federal Trade Commission v. Ruberoid Co.,_ 343 U.S. 470, 487, 72 S.Ct.
800, 810, 96 L.Ed. 1081 (1952) (Jackson, J. dissenting).

148

This Court's decisions sanctioning such delegations make clear that Article I
does not require all action with the effect of legislation to be passed as a
law.

149

Theoretically, agencies and officials were asked only to "fill up the
details," and the rule was that "Congress cannot delegate any part of its
legislative power except under a limitation of a prescribed standard." _United
States v. Chicago, Milwaukee R. Co.,_ 282 U.S. 311, 324, 51 S.Ct. 159, 162, 75
L.Ed. 359 (1931). Chief Justice Taft elaborated the standard in _J.W. Hampton
& Co. v. United States,_ 276 U.S. 394, 409, 48 S.Ct. 348, 352, 72 L.Ed. 624
(1928): "If Congress shall lay down by legislative act an intelligible
principle to which the person or body authorized to fix such rates is directed
to conform, such legislative action is not a forbidden delegation of
legislative power." In practice, however, restrictions on the scope of the
power that could be delegated diminished and all but disappeared. In only two
instances did the Court find an unconstitutional delegation. _Panama Refining
Co. v. Ryan,_ 293 U.S. 388, 55 S.Ct. 241, 79 L.Ed. 446 (1935); _Schechter
Poultry Corp. v. United States,_ 295 U.S. 495, 55 S.Ct. 837, 79 L.Ed. 1570
(1935). In other cases, the "intelligible principle" through which agencies
have attained enormous control over the economic affairs of the country was
held to include such formulations as "just and reasonable," _Tagg Bros. &
Moorhead v. United States,_ 280 U.S. 420, 50 S.Ct. 220, 74 L.Ed. 524 (1930),
"public interest," _New York Central Securities Corp. v. United States,_ 287
U.S. 12, 53 S.Ct. 45, 77 L.Ed. 138 (1932), "public convenience, interest, or
necessity," _Federal Radio Comm. v. Nelson Bros. Bond & Mortgage Co.,_ 289
U.S. 266, 285, 53 S.Ct. 627, 636, 77 L.Ed. 1166 (1933), and "unfair methods of
competition." _FTC v. Gratz,_ 253 U.S. 421, 40 S.Ct. 572, 64 L.Ed. 993 (1920).

150

The wisdom and the constitutionality of these broad delegations are matters
that still have not been put to rest. But for present purposes, these cases
establish that by virtue of congressional delegation, legislative power can be
exercised by independent agencies and Executive departments without the
passage of new legislation. For some time, the sheer amount of law--the
substantive rules that regulate private conduct and direct the operation of
government--made by the agencies has far outnumbered the lawmaking engaged in
by Congress through the traditional process. There is no question but that
agency rulemaking is lawmaking in any functional or realistic sense of the
term. The Administr tive Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. § 551(4) provides that a
"rule" is an agency statement "designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe
law or policy." When agencies are authorized to prescribe law through
substantive rulemaking, the administrator's regulation is not only due
deference, but is accorded "legislative effect." See, _e.g. Schweiker v. Gray
Panthers,_ 453 U.S. 34, 43-44, 101 S.Ct. 2633, 2640, 69 L.Ed.2d 460 (1981);
_Batterton v. Francis,_ 432 U.S. 416, 97 S.Ct. 2399, 53 L.Ed.2d 448 (1977).19
These regulations bind courts and officers of the federal government, may pre-
empt state law, see, _e.g., Fidelity Federal Savings & Loan Assoc. v. De la
Cuesta,_ \--- U.S. ----, 102 S.Ct. 3014, 73 L.Ed.2d 664 (1982), and grant
rights to and impose obligations on the public. In sum, they have the force of
law.

151

If Congress may delegate lawmaking power to independent and executive
agencies, it is most difficult to understand Article I as forbidding Congress
from also reserving a check on legislative power for itself. Absent the veto,
the agencies receiving delegations of legislative or quasi-legislative power
may issue regulations having the force of law without bicameral approval and
without the President's signature. It is thus not apparent why the reservation
of a veto over the exercise of that legislative power must be subject to a
more exacting test. In both cases, it is enough that the initial statutory
authorizations comply with the Article I requirements.

152

Nor are there strict limits on the agents that may receive such delegations of
legislative authority so that it might be said that the legislature can
delegate authority to others but not to itself. While most authority to issue
rules and regulations is given to the executive branch and the independent
regulatory agencies, statutory delegations to private persons have also passed
this Court's scrutiny. In _Currin v. Wallace,_ 306 U.S. 1, 59 S.Ct. 379, 83
L.Ed. 441 (1939), the statute provided that restrictions upon the production
or marketing of agricultural commodities was to become effective only upon the
favorable vote by a prescribed majority of the affected farmers. _United
States v. Rock Royal Co-operative,_ 307 U.S. 533, 577, 59 S.Ct. 993, 1014, 83
L.Ed. 1446 (1939), upheld an act which gave producers of specified commodities
the right to veto marketing orders issued by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Assuming _Currin_ and _Rock Royal Co-operative_ remain sound law, the Court's
decision today suggests that Congress may place a "veto" power over
suspensions of deportation in private hands or in the hands of an independent
agency, but is forbidden from reserving such authority for itself. Perhaps
this odd result could be justified on other constitutional grounds, such as
the separation of powers, but certainly it cannot be defended as consistent
with the Court's view of the Article I presentme t and bicameralism
commands.20

153

The Court's opinion in the present case comes closest to facing the reality of
administrative lawmaking in considering the contention that the Attorney
General's action in suspending deportation under § 244 is itself a legislative
act. The Court posits that the Attorney General is acting in an Article II
enforcement capacity under § 244\. This characterization is at odds with
_Mahler v. Eby,_ 264 U.S. 32, 40, 44 S.Ct. 283, 286, 68 L.Ed. 549 (1924),
where the power conferred on the Executive to deport aliens was considered a
delegation of legislative power. The Court suggests, however, that the
Attorney General acts in an Article II capacity because "[t]he courts when a
case or controversy arises, can always 'ascertain whether the will of Congress
has been obeyed,' _Yakus v. United States,_ 321 U.S. 414, 425 [64 S.Ct. 660,
667-668, 88 L.Ed. 834] (1944), and can enforce adherence to statutory
standards." _Ante,_ at 953, n. 16. This assumption is simply wrong, as the
Court itself points out: "We are aware of no decision . . . where a federal
court has reviewed a decision of the Attorney General suspending deportation
of an alien pursuant to the standards set out in § 244(a)(1). This is not
surprising, given that no party to such action has either the motivation or
the right to appeal from it." _Ante,_ at 957, n. 21. It is perhaps on the
erroneous premise that judicial review may check abuses of the § 244 power
that the Court also submits that "The bicameral process is not necessary as a
check on the Executive's administration of the laws because his administrative
activity cannot reach beyond the limits of the statute that created it--a
statute duly enacted pursuant to Art. I, §§ 1, 7." _Ante,_ at 953, n. 16. On
the other hand, the Court's reasoning does persuasively explain why a
resolution of disapproval under § 244(c)(2) need not again be subject to the
bicameral process. Because it serves only to check the Attorney General's
exercise of the suspension authority granted by § 244, the disapproval
resolution--unlike the Attorney General's action "cannot reach beyond the
limits of the statute that created it--a statute duly enacted pursuant to
Article I."

154

More fundamentally, even if the Court correctly characterizes the Attorney
General's authority under § 244 as an Article II Executive power, the Court
concedes that certain administrative agency action, such as rulemaking, "may
resemble lawmaking" and recognizes that "[t]his Court has referred to agency
activity as being 'quasi-legislative' in character. _Humphrey's Executor v.
United States,_ 295 U.S. 602, 628 [55 S.Ct. 869, 874, 79 L.Ed. 1611] (1935)."
_Ante,_ at 953, n. 16. Such rules and adjudications by the agencies meet the
Court's own definition of legislative action for they "alter[ ] the legal
rights, duties, and relations of persons . . . outside the legislative
branch," _ante,_ at 952, and involve "determinations of policy," _ante,_ at
954. Under the Court's analys s, the Executive Branch and the independent
agencies may make rules with the effect of law while Congress, in whom the
Framers confided the legislative power, Art. I, § 1, may not exercise a veto
which precludes such rules from having operative force. If the effective
functioning of a complex modern government requires the delegation of vast
authority which, by virtue of its breadth, is legislative or "quasi-
legislative" in character, I cannot accept that Article I--which is, after
all, the source of the non-delegation doctrine--should forbid Congress from
qualifying that grant with a legislative veto.21

C

155

The Court also takes no account of perhaps the most relevant consideration:
However resolutions of disapproval under § 244(c)(2) are formally
characterized, in reality, a departure from the status quo occurs only upon
the concurrence of opinion among the House, Senate, and President.
Reservations of legislative authority to be exercised by Congress should be
upheld if the exercise of such reserved authority is consistent with the
distribution of and limits upon legislative power that Article I provides.

156

* As its history reveals, § 244(c)(2) withstands this analysis. Until 1917, Congress had never established laws concerning the deportation of aliens. The Immigration Act of 1924 enlarged the categories of aliens subject to mandatory deportation, and substantially increased the likelihood of hardships to individuals by abolishing in most cases the previous time limitation of three years within which deportation proceedings had to be commenced. Immigration Act of 1924, ch. 190, 43 Stat. 153 (1924). Thousands of persons, who either had entered the country in more lenient times or had been smuggled in as children, or had overstayed their permits, faced the prospect of deportation. Enforcement of the Act gre more rigorous over the years with the deportation of thousand of aliens without regard to the mitigating circumstances of particular cases. See Mansfield, The Legislative Veto and the Deportation of Aliens, 1 Public Administration Review 281 (1940). Congress provided relief in certain cases through the passage of private bills.

157

In 1933, when deportations reached their zenith, the Secretary of Labor
temporarily suspended numerous deportations on grounds of hardship, 78
Cong.Rec. 11783 (1934), and proposed legislation to allow certain deportable
aliens to remain in the country. H.R. 9725, 73d Cong., 2d Sess. (1934). The
Labor Department bill was opposed, however, as "grant[ing] too much
discretionary authority," 78 Cong.Rec. 11790 (remarks of Rep. Dirksen), and it
failed decisively. _Id.,_ at 11791.

158

The following year, the administration proposed bills to authorize an inter-
Departmental committee to grant permanent residence to deportable aliens who
had lived in the United States for 10 years or who had close relatives here.
S. 2969 and H.R. 8163, 74th Cong., 1st Sess. (1935). These bills were also
attacked as an "abandonment of congressional control over the deportation of
undesirable aliens," H.R.Rep. No. 1110, Part 2, 74th Cong., 1st Sess. 2
(1935), and were not enacted. A similar fate awaited a bill introduced in the
75th Congress that would have authorized the Secretary to grant permanent
residence to up to 8,000 deportable aliens. The measure passed the House, but
did not come to a vote in the Senate. H.R. 6391, 83 Cong.Rec. 8992-96 (1938).

159

The succeeding Congress again attempted to find a legislative solution to the
deportation problem. The initial House bill required congressional action to
cancel individual deportations, 84 Cong.Rec. 10455 (1939), but the Senate
amended the legislation to provide that deportable aliens should not be
deported unless the Congress by Act or resolution rejected the recommendation
of the Secretary. H.R. 5138, § 10, as reported with amendments by S.Rep. No.
1721, 76th Cong., 3d Sess. 2 (1940). The compromise solution, the immediate
predecessor to § 244(c), allowed the Attorney General to suspend the
deportation of qualified aliens. Their deportation would be canceled and
permanent residence granted if the House and Senate did not adopt a concurrent
resolution of disapproval. S.Rep. No. 1796, 76th Cong., 3rd Sess. 5-6 (1940).
The Executive Branch played a major role in fashioning this compromise, see 86
Cong.Rec. 8345 (1940), and President Roosevelt approved the legislation, which
became the Alien Registration Act of 1940, P.L. No. 670, 54 Stat. 670.

160

In 1947, the Department of Justice requested legislation authorizing the
Attorney General to cancel deportations without congressional review. H.R.
2933, 80th Cong., 1st Sess. (1947). The purpose of the proposal was to "save
time and energy of everyone concerned . . ." Regulating Powers of the Attorney
General to Suspend Deportation of Aliens: Hearings Before the Subcomm. on
Immigration of the House Comm. on the Judiciary, 80th Cong., 1st Sess. 34
(1977). The Senate Judiciary Committee objected, stating that "affirmative
action by the Congress in all suspension cases should be required before
deportation proceedings may be canceled." S.Rep. No. 1204, 80th Cong., 2d
Sess. 4 (1948). See also H.R.Rep. No. 647, 80th Cong., 1st Sess. 2 (1947).
Congress not only rejected the Department's request for final authority but
amended the Immigration Act to require that cancellation of deportation be
approved by a concurrent resolution of the Congress. President Truman signed
the bill without objection. Act of July 1, 1948, P.L. No. 863, 62 Stat. 1206.

161

Practice over the ensuing several years convinced Congress that the
requirement of affirmative approval was "not workable . . . and would, in
time, interfere with the legislative work of the House." House Judiciary
Committee, H.R.Rep. No. 362, 81st Cong., 1st Sess. 2 (1949 . In preparing the
comprehensive Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952, the Senate Judiciary
Committee recommended that for certain classes of aliens the adjustment of
status be subject to the disapproval of either House; but deportation of an
alien "who is of the criminal, subversive, or immoral classes or who overstays
his period of admission," would be cancelled only upon a concurrent resolution
disapproving the deportation. S.Rep. No. 1514, 81st Cong.2d Sess. 610 (1950).
Legislation reflecting this change was passed by both Houses, and enacted into
law as part of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 over President
Truman's veto, which was not predicated on the presence of a legislative veto.
Pub.L. No. 414, 66 Stat. 163, 214 (1952). In subsequent years, the Congress
refused further requests that the Attorney General be given final authority to
grant discretionary relief for specified categories of aliens, and § 244
remained intact to the present.

162

Section 244(a)(1) authorizes the Attorney General, in his discretion, to
suspend the deportation of certain aliens who are otherwise deportable and,
upon Congress' approval, to adjust their status to that of aliens lawfully
admitted for permanent residence. In order to be eligible for this relief, an
alien must have been physically present in the United States for a continuous
period of not less than seven years, must prove he is of good moral character,
and must prove that he or his immediate family would suffer "extreme hardship"
if he is deported. Judicial review of a denial of relief may be sought. Thus,
the suspension proceeding "has two phases: a determination whether the
statutory conditions have been met, which generally involves a question of
law, and a determination whether relief shall be granted, which [ultimately] .
. . is confided to the sound discretion of the Attorney General [and his
delegates]." 2 C. Gordon & H. Rosenfield, Immigration Law and Procedure §
7.9a(5) at 7-134.

163

There is also a third phase to the process. Under § 244(c)(1) the Attorney
General must report all such suspensions, with a detailed statement of facts
and reasons, to the Congress. Either House may then act, in that session or
the next, to block the suspension of deportation by passing a resolution of
disapproval. § 244(c)(2). Upon Congressional approval of the suspension--by
its silence--the alien's permanent status is adjusted to that of a lawful
resident alien.

164

The history of the Immigration Act makes clear that § 244(c)(2) did not alter
the division of actual authority between Congress and the Executive. At all
times, whether through private bills, or through affirmative concurrent
resolutions, or through the present one-House veto, a permanent change in a
deportable alien's status could be accomplished only with the agreement of the
Attorney General, the House, and the Senate.

2

165

The central concern of the presentation and bicameralism requirements of
Article I is that when a departure from the legal status quo is undertaken, it
is done with the approval of the President and both Houses of Congress--or, in
the event of a presidential veto, a two-thirds majority in both Houses. This
interest is fully satisfied by the operation of § 244(c)(2). The President's
approval is found in the Attorney General's action in recommending to Congress
that the deportation order for a given alien be suspended. The House and the
Senate indicate their approval of the Executive's action by not passing a
resolution of disapproval within the statutory period. Thus, a change in the
legal status quo--the deportability of the alien--is consummated only with the
approval of each of the three relevant actors. The disagreement of any one of
the three maintains the alien's pre-existing status: the Executive may choose
not to recommend suspension; the House and Senate may each veto the
recommendation. The effect on the rights and obligations of the affected
individuals and upon the legisl tive system is precisely the same as if a
private bill were introduced but failed to receive the necessary approval.
"The President and the two Houses enjoy exactly the same say in what the law
is to be as would have been true for each without the presence of the one-
House veto, and nothing in the law is changed absent the concurrence of the
President and a majority in each House." _Atkins v. United States,_ 556 F.2d
1028, 1064 (Ct. Claims, 1977), cert. denied, 434 U.S. 1009, 98 S.Ct. 718, 54
L.Ed.2d 751 (1978).

166

This very construction of the Presentment Clauses which the Executive Branch
now rejects was the basis upon which the Executive Branch defended the
constitutionality of the Reorganization Act, 5 U.S.C. § 906(a) (1979), which
provides that the President's proposed reorganization plans take effect only
if not vetoed by either House. When the Department of Justice advised the
Senate on the constitutionality of congressional review in reorganization
legislation in 1949, it stated: "In this procedure there is no question
involved of the Congress taking legislative action beyond its initial passage
of the Reorganization Act." S.Rep. No. 232, 81st Cong., 1st Sess. 20 (1949)
(Dept. of Justice Memorandum). This also represents the position of the
Attorney General more recently.22

167

Thus understood, § 244(c)(2) fully effectuates the purposes of the
bicameralism and presentation requirements. I now briefly consider possible
objections to the analysis.

168

First, it may be asserted that Chadha's status before legislative disapproval
is one of nondeportation and that the exercise of the veto, unlike the failure
of a private bill, works a change in the status quo. This position plainly
ignores the statutory language. At no place in § 244 has Congress delegated to
the Attorney General any final power to determine which aliens shall be
allowed to remain in the United States. Congress has retained the ultimate
power to pass on such changes in deportable status. By its own terms, § 244(a)
states that whatever power the Attorney General has been delegated to suspend
deportation and adjust status is to be exercisable only "as hereinafter
prescribed in this section." Subsection (c) is part of that section. A grant
of "suspension" does not cancel the alien's deportation or adjust the alien's
status to that of a permanent resident alien. A suspension order is merely a
"deferment of deportation," _McGrath v. Kristensen,_ 340 U.S. 162, 168, 71
S.Ct. 224, 228-229, 95 L.Ed. 173 (1950), which can mature into a cancellation
of deportation and adjustment of status only upon the approval of Congress--by
way of silence--under § 244(c)(2). Only then does the statute authorize the
Attorney General to "cancel deportation proceedings" § 244(c)(2), and "record
the alien's lawful admission for permanent residence . . ." § 244(d). The
Immigration a d Naturalization Service's action, on behalf of the Attorney
General, "cannot become effective without ratification by Congress." 2 Gordon
and Rosenfield, Immigration Law and Procedure, § 8.14 p. 8-121 (rev. ed.
1979). Until that ratification occurs, the executive's action is simply a
recommendation that Congress finalize the suspension--in itself, it works no
legal change.

169

Second, it may be said that this approach leads to the incongruity that the
two-House veto is more suspect than its one-House brother. Although the idea
may be initially counter-intuitive, on close analysis, it is not at all
unusual that the one-House veto is of more certain constitutionality than the
two-House version. If the Attorney General's action is a proposal for
legislation, then the disapproval of but a single House is all that is
required to prevent its passage. Because approval is indicated by the failure
to veto, the one-House veto satisfies the requirement of bicameral approval.
The two-House version may present a different question. The concept that
"neither branch of Congress, when acting separately, can lawfully exercise
more power than is conferred by the Constitution on the whole body," _Kilbourn
v. Thompson,_ 103 U.S. 168, 182, 26 L.Ed. 377 (1881) is fully observed.23

170

Third, it may be objected that Congress cannot indicate its approval of
legislative change by inaction. In the Court of Appeals' view, inaction by
Congress "could equally imply endorsement, acquiescence, passivity, indecision
or indifference." 634 F.2d, at 435, and the Court appears to echo this
concern, _Ante,_ at 958, n. 22. This objection appears more properly directed
at the wisdom of the legislative veto than its constitutionality. The
Constitution does not and cannot guarantee that legislators will carefully
scrutinize legislation and deliberate before acting. In a democracy it is the
electorate that holds the legislators accountable for the wisdom of their
choices. It is hard to maintain that a private bill receives any greater
individualized scrutiny than a resolution of disapproval under § 244(c)(2).
Certainly the legislative veto is no more susceptible to this attack than the
Court's increasingly common practice of according weight to the failure of
Congress to disturb an Executive or independent agency's action. See _supra_
at 11, n. 9. Earlier this Term, the Court found it important that Congress
failed to act on bills proposed to overturn the Internal Revenue Service's
interpretation of the requirements for tax-exempt status under § 501(c)(3) of
the tax code. _Bob Jones University v. United States,_ \--- U.S. ----, ----,
103 S.Ct. 2017, 2033, 76 L.Ed.2d 157 (1983). If Congress may be said to have
ratified the Internal Revenue Service's interpretation without passing new
legislation, Congress may also be said to approve a suspension of deportation
by the Attorney General when it fails to exercise its veto authority.24 The
requirements of Article I are not compromised by the Congressional scheme.

IV

171

The Court of Appeals struck § 244(c) 2) as violative of the constitutional
principle of separation of powers. It is true that the purpose of separating
the authority of government is to prevent unnecessary and dangerous
concentration of power in one branch. For that reason, the Framers saw fit to
divide and balance the powers of government so that each branch would be
checked by the others. Virtually every part of our constitutional system bears
the mark of this judgment.

172

But the history of the separation of powers doctrine is also a history of
accommodation and practicality. Apprehensions of an overly powerful branch
have not led to undue prophylactic measures that handicap the effective
working of the national government as a whole. The Constitution does not
contemplate total separation of the three branches of Government. _Buckley v.
Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 121, 96 S.Ct. 612, 683, 46 L.Ed.2d 659 (1976). "[A]
hermetic sealing off of the three branches of Government from one another
would preclude the establishment of a Nation capable of governing itself
effectively." _Ibid._25

173

Our decisions reflect this judgment. As already noted, the Court, recognizing
that modern government must address a formidable agenda of complex policy
issues, countenanced the delegation of extensive legislative authority to
executive and independent agencies. _Hampton & Co. v. United States,_ 276 U.S.
394, 406, 48 S.Ct. 348, 351, 72 L.Ed. 624 (1928). The separation of powers
doctrine has heretofore led to the invalidation of government action only when
the challenged action violated some express provision in the Constitution. In
_Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 118-124, 96 S.Ct. 612, 681-685, 46 L.Ed.2d 659
(1976) (per curiam) and _Myers v. United States,_ 272 U.S. 52, 47 S.Ct. 21, 71
L.Ed. 160 (1926), congressional action compromised the appointment power of
the President. See also _Springer v. Phillipine Islands,_ 277 U.S. 189,
200-201, 48 S.Ct. 480, 481-482, 72 L.Ed. 845 (1928). In _United States v.
Klein,_ 13 Wall. 128, 20 L.Ed. 519 (1871), an Act of Congress was struck for
encroaching upon judicial power, but the Court found that the Act also
impinged upon the Executive's exclusive pardon power. Art. II, § 2\. Because
we must have a workable efficient government, this is as it should be.

174

This is the teaching of _Nixon v. Administrator of Gen. Servs.,_ 433 U.S. 425,
97 S.Ct. 2777, 53 L.Ed.2d 867 (1977), which, in rejecting a separation of
powers objection to a law requiring that the Administrator take custody of
certain presidential papers, set forth a framework for evaluating such claims:

175

"[I]n determining whether the Act disrupts the proper balance between the
coordinate branches, the proper inquiry focuses on the extent to which it
prevents the Executive Branch from accomplishing its constitutionally assigned
functions. _United States v. Nixon,_ 418 U.S. [683] at 711-712 [94 S.Ct. 3090,
3109, 41 L.Ed.2d 1039]. Only where the potential for disruption is present
must we then determine whether that impact is justified by an overriding need
to promote objectives within the constitutio al authority of Congress." 433
U.S., at 443, 97 S.Ct., at 2790.

176

Section 244(c)(2) survives this test. The legislative veto provision does not
"prevent the Executive Branch from accomplishing its constitutionally assigned
functions." First, it is clear that the Executive Branch has no
"constitutionally assigned" function of suspending the deportation of aliens.
" 'Over no conceivable subject is the legislative power of Congress more
complete than it is over' the admission of aliens." _Kleindienst v. Mandel,_
408 U.S. 753, 766, 92 S.Ct. 2576, 2583, 33 L.Ed.2d 683 (1972), quoting
_Oceanic Steam Navigation Co. v. Stranahan,_ 214 U.S. 320, 339, 29 S.Ct. 671,
676, 53 L.Ed. 1013 (1909). Nor can it be said that the inherent function of
the Executive Branch in executing the law is involved. _The Steel Seizure
Case_ resolved that the Article II mandate for the President to execute the
law is a directive to enforce the law which Congress has written. _Youngstown
Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,_ 343 U.S. 579, 72 S.Ct. 863, 96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952).
"The duty of the President to see that the laws be executed is a duty that
does not go beyond the laws or require him to achieve more than Congress sees
fit to leave within his power." _Myers v. United States,_ 272 U.S., at 177, 47
S.Ct., at 85 (Holmes, J., dissenting); 272 U.S., at 247, 47 S.Ct., at 69
(Brandeis, J., dissenting). Here, § 244 grants the executive only a qualified
suspension authority and it is only that authority which the President is
constitutionally authorized to execute.

177

Moreover, the Court believes that the legislative veto we consider today is
best characterized as an exercise of legislative or quasi-legislative
authority. Under this characterization, the practice does not, even on the
surface, constitute an infringement of executive or judicial prerogative. The
Attorney General's suspension of deportation is equivalent to a proposal for
legislation. The nature of the Attorney General's role as recommendatory is
not altered because § 244 provides for congressional action through
disapproval rather than by ratification. In comparison to private bills, which
must be initiated in the Congress and which allow a Presidential veto to be
overriden by a two-thirds majority in both Houses of Congress, § 244 augments
rather than reduces the executive branch's authority. So understood,
congressional review does not undermine, as the Court of Appeals thought, the
"weight and dignity" that attends the decisions of the Executive Branch.

178

Nor does § 244 infringe on the judicial power, as Justice POWELL would hold.
Section 244 makes clear that Congress has reserved its own judgment as part of
the statutory process. Congressional action does not substitute for judicial
review of the Attorney General's decisions. The Act provides for judicial
review of the refusal of the Attorney General to suspend a deportation and to
transmit a recommendation to Congress. _INS v. Wang,_ 450 U.S. 139, 101 S.Ct.
1027, 67 L.Ed.2d 123 (1981) (per curiam). But the courts have not been given
the authority to review whether an alien should be given permanent status;
review is limited to whether the Attorney General has properly applied the
statutory standards for essentially denying the alien a recommendation that
his deportable status be changed by the Congress. Moreover, there is no
constitutional obligation to provide any judicial review whatever for a
failure to suspend deportation. "The power of Congress, therefore, to expel,
like the power to exclude aliens, or any specified class of aliens, from the
country, may be exercised entirely through executive officers; or Congress may
call in the aid of the judiciary to ascertain any contested facts on which an
alien's right to be in the country has been made by Congress to depend." _Fong
Yue Ting v. United States,_ 149 U.S. 698, 713-714, 13 S.Ct. 1016, 1022, 37
L.Ed. 905 (1893). See also _Tutun v. United States,_ 270 U.S. 68, 576, 46
S.Ct. 425, 426, 70 L.Ed. 738 (1926); _Ludecke v. Watkins,_ 335 U.S. 160,
171-172, 68 S.Ct. 1429, 1434-1435, 92 L.Ed. 1881 (1948); _Harisiades v.
Shaughnessy,_ 342 U.S. 580, 590, 72 S.Ct. 512, 519, 96 L.Ed. 586 (1952).

179

I do not suggest that all legislative vetoes are necessarily consistent with
separation of powers principles. A legislative check on an inherently
executive function, for example that of initiating prosecutions, poses an
entirely different question. But the legislative veto device here--and in many
other settings--is far from an instance of legislative tyranny over the
Executive. It is a necessary check on the unavoidably expanding power of the
agencies, both executive and independent, as they engage in exercising
authority delegated by Congress.

V

180

I regret that I am in disagreement with my colleagues on the fundamental
questions that this case presents. But even more I regret the destructive
scope of the Court's holding. It reflects a profoundly different conception of
the Constitution than that held by the Courts which sanctioned the modern
administrative state. Today's decision strikes down in one fell swoop
provisions in more laws enacted by Congress than the Court has cumulatively
invalidated in its history. I fear it will now be more difficult "to insure
that the fundamental policy decisions in our society will be made not by an
appointed official but by the body immediately responsible to the people,"
_Arizona v. California,_ 373 U.S. 546, 626, 83 S.Ct. 1468, 1511, 10 L.Ed.2d
542 (1963) (Harlan, J., dissenting). I must dissent.

APPENDIX 1

181

STATUTES WITH PROVISIONS AUTHORIZING CONGRESSIONAL REVIEW

182

This compilation, reprinted from the Brief for the United States Senate,
identifies and describes briefly current statutory provisions for a
legislative veto by one or both Houses of Congress. Statutory provisions for a
veto by committees of the Congress and provisions which require legislation
(i.e., passage of a joint resolution) are not included. The fifty-six statutes
in the compilation (some of which contain more than one provision for
legislative review) are divided into six broad categories: foreign affairs and
national security, budget, international trade, energy, rulemaking and
miscellaneous.

A.

FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND NATIONAL SECURITY

183

1\. Act for International Development of 1961, Pub.L. No. 87-195, § 617, 75
Stat. 424, 444, 22 U.S.C. 2367 (Funds made available for foreign assistance
under the Act may be terminated by concurrent resolution).

184

2\. War Powers Resolution, Pub.L. No. 93-148, § 5, 87 Stat. 555, 556-557
(1973), 50 U.S.C. 1544 (Absent declaration of war, President may be directed
by concurrent resolution to remove United States armed forces engaged in
foreign hostilities.)

185

3\. Department of Defense Appropriation Authorization Act, 1974, Pub.L. No.
93-155, § 807, 87 Stat. 605, 615 (1973), 50 U.S.C. 1431 (National defense
contracts obligating the United States for any amount in excess of $25,000,000
may be disapproved by resolution of either House).

186

4\. Department of Defense Appropriation Authorization Act, 1975, Pub.L. No.
93-365, § 709(c), 88 Stat. 399, 408 (1974), 50 U.S.C. app. 2403-1(c)
(Applications for export of defense goods, technology or techniques may be
disapproved by concurrent resolution).

187

5\. H.R.J.Res. 683, Pub.L. No. 94-110, § 1, 89 Stat. 572 (1975), 22 U.S.C.
2441 note (Assignment of civilian personnel to Sinai may be disapproved by
concurrent resolution).

188

6\. International Development and Food Assistance Act of 1975, Pub.L. No.
94-161, § 310, 89 Stat. 849, 860, 22 U.S.C. 2151n (Foreign assistance to
countries not meeting human rights standards may be terminated by concurrent
resolution).

189

7\. International Security Assistance and Arms Control Act of 1976, Pub.L. No.
94-329, § 211, 90 Stat. 729, 743, 22 U.S.C. 2776(b) (President's letter of
offer to sell major defense equipment may be disapproved by concurrent
resolution).

190

8\. National Emergencies Act, Pub.L. No. 94-412, § 202, 90 Stat. 1255 (1976),
50 U.S.C. 1622 (Presidentially declared national emergency may be terminated
by concurrent resolution).

191

9\. International Navigational Rules Act of 1977, Pub.L. No. 95-75, § 3(d), 91
Stat. 308, 33 U.S.C. § 1602(d) (Supp. III 1979) (Presidential proclamation of
International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea may be disapproved
by concurrent resolution).

192

10\. International Security Assistance Act of 1977, Pub.L. No. 95-92, § 16, 91
Stat. 614, 622, 22 U.S.C. § 2753(d)(2) (Supp. III 1979) (President's proposed
transfer of arms to a third country may be disapproved by concurrent
resolution).

193

11\. Act of December 8 [28], 1977, Pub.L. No. 95-223, § 207(2)(b), 91 Stat.
1625, 1628, 50 U.S.C. 1706(b) (Supp. III 1979) (Presidentially declared
national emergency and exercise of conditional powers may be terminated by
concurrent resolution).

194

12\. Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act of 1978, Pub.L. No. 95-242, §§ 303, 304,
306, 307, 401, 92 Stat. 120, 130, 134, 137-38, 139, 144, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2160(f),
2155(b), 2157(b), 2153(d) (Supp. III 1979) (Cooperative agreements concerning
storage and disposition of spent nuclear fuel, proposed export of nuclear
facilities, materials or technology and proposed agreements for international
cooperation in nuclear reactor development may be disapproved by concurrent
resolution).

B.

BUDGET

195

13\. Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974, Pub.L. No.
93-344, § 1013, 88 Stat. 297, 334-35, 31 U.S.C. 1403 (The proposed deferral of
budget authority provided for a specific project or purpose may be disapproved
by an impoundment resolution by either House).

C.

INTERNATIONAL TRADE

196

14\. Trade Expansion Act of 1962, Pub.L. No. 87-794, § 351, 76 Stat. 872, 899,
19 U.S.C. 1981(a) (Tariff or duty recommended by Tariff Commission may be
imposed by concurrent resolution of approval).

197

15\. Trade Act of 1974, Pub.L. No. 93-618, §§ 203(c), 302(b), 402(d), 407, 88
Stat. 1978, 2016, 2043, 2057-60, 2063-64, 19 U.S.C. 2253(c), 2412(b), 2432,
2434 [2437] (Proposed Presidential actions on import relief and actions
concerning certain countries may be disapproved by concurrent resolution;
various Presidential proposals for waiver extensions and for extension of
nondiscriminatory treatment to products of foreign countries may be
disapproved by simple (either House) or concurrent resolutions).

198

16\. Export-Import Bank Amendments of 1974, Pub.L. No. 93-646, § 8, 88 Stat.
2333, 2336, 12 U.S.C. 635e (Presidentially proposed limitation for exports to
USSR in excess of $300,000,000 must be approved by concurrent resolution).

D.

ENERGY

199

17\. Act of November 16, 1973, Pub.L. No. 93-153, § 101, 87 Stat. 576, 582, 30
U.S.C. 185(u) (Continuation of oil exports being made pursuant to President's
finding that such exports are in the national interest may be disapproved by
concurrent resolution).

200

18\. Federal Nonnuclear Energy Research and Development Act of 1974, Pub.L.
No. 93-577, § 12, 88 Stat. 1878, 1892-1893, 42 U.S.C. 5911 (Rules or orders
proposed by the President concerning allocation or acquisition of essential
materials may be disapproved by resolution of either House).

201

19\. Energy Policy and Conservation Act, Pub.L. No. 94-163, § 551, 89 Stat.
871, 965 (1975), 42 U.S.C. 6421(c) (Certain Presidentially proposed "energy
actions" involving fuel economy and pricing may be disapproved by resolution
of either House).

202

20\. Naval Petroleum Reserves Production Act of 1976, Pub.L. No. 94-258, §
201, 90 Stat. 303, 309, 10 U.S.C. 7422(c)(2)(C) (President's extension of
production period for naval petroleum reserves may be disapproved by
resolution of either House).

203

21\. Energy Conservation and Production Act, Pub.L. No. 94-385, § 305, 90
Stat. 1125, 1148 (1976), 42 U.S.C. 6834 (Proposed sanctions involving federal
assistance and the energy conservation performance standards for new buildings
must be approved by resolut on of both Houses).

204

22\. Department of Energy Act of 1978--Civilian Applications, Pub.L. No.
95-238, §§ 107, 207(b), 92 Stat. 47, 55, 70, 22 U.S.C. 3224a, 42 U.S.C.
5919(m) (Supp. III 1979) (International agreements and expenditures by
Secretary of Energy of appropriations for foreign spent nuclear fuel storage
must be approved by concurrent resolution, if not consented to by
legislation;) (plans for such use of appropriated funds may be disapproved by
either House;) (financing in excess of $50,000,000 for demonstration
facilities must be approved by resolution in both Houses).

205

23\. Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act Amendments of 1978, Pub.L. No. 95-372,
§§ 205(a), 208, 92 Stat. 629, 641, 668, 43 U.S.C. §§ 1337(a), 1354(c) (Supp.
III 1979) (Establishment by Secretary of Energy of oil and gas lease bidding
system may be disapproved by resolution of either House;) (export of oil and
gas may be disapproved by concurrent resolution).

206

24\. Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, Pub.L. No. 95-621, §§ 122(c)(1) and (2),
202(c), 206(d)(2), 507, 92 Stat. 3350, 3370, 3371, 3372, 3380, 3406, 15 U.S.C.
3332, 3342(c), 3346(d)(2), 3417 (Supp. III 1979) (Presidential reimposition of
natural gas price controls may be disapproved by concurrent resolution;)
(Congress may reimpose natural gas price controls by concurrent resolution;)
(Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) amendment to pass through
incremental costs of natural gas, and exemptions therefrom, may be disapproved
by resolution of either House;) (procedure for congressional review
established).

207

25\. Export Administration Act of 1979, Pub.L. No. 96-72, § 7(d)(B), 7(g)(3),
93 Stat. 503, 518, 520, 50 U.S.C. app. 2406(d)(2)(B), 2406(g)(3) (Supp. III
1979) (President's proposal to domestically produce crude oil must be approved
by concurrent resolution;) (action by Secretary of Commerce to prohibit or
curtail export of agricultural commodities may be disapproved by concurrent
resolution).

208

26\. Energy Security Act, Pub.L. No. 96-294, §§ 104(b)(3), 104(e), 126(d)(2),
126(d)(3), 128, 129, 132(a)(3), 133(a)(3), 137(b)(5), 141(d), 179(a), 803, 94
Stat. 611, 618, 619, 620, 623-26, 628-29, 649, 650-52, 659, 660, 664, 666,
679, 776 (1980) (to be codified in 50 U.S.C. app. 2091-93, 2095, 2096, 2097,
42 U.S.C. 8722, 8724, 8725, 8732, 8733, 8737, 8741, 8779, 6240) (Loan
guarantees by Departments of Defense, Energy and Commerce in excess of
specified amounts may be disapproved by resolution of either House;)
(President's proposal to provide loans or guarantees in excess of established
amounts may be disapproved by resolution of either House;) (proposed award by
President of individual contracts for purchase of more than 75,000 barrels per
day of crude oil may be disapproved by resolution of either House;)
(President's proposals to overcome energy shortage through synthetic fuels
development, and individual contracts to purchase more than 75,000 barrels per
day, including use of loans or guarantees, may be disapproved by resolution of
either House;) (procedures for either House to disapprove proposals made under
Act are established;) (request by Synthetic Fuels Corporation (SFC) for
additional time to submit its comprehensive strategy may be disapproved by
resolution of either House;) (proposed amendment to comprehensive strategy by
SFC Board of Directors may be disapproved by concurrent resolution of either
House or by failure of both Houses to pass concurrent resolution of approval;)
(procedure for either House to disapprove certain proposed actions of SFC is
established;) (procedure for both Houses to approve by concurrent resolution
or either House to reject concurrent resolution for proposed amendments to
comprehensive strategy of SFC is established;) (proposed loans and loan
guarantees by SFC may be disapproved by resolution of either House;)
(acquisition by SFC of a synthetic fuels project which is receiving financial
assistance may be disapproved by resolution of either House;) (SFC c ntract
renegotiations exceeding initial cost estimates by 175% may be disapproved by
resolution of either House;) (proposed financial assistance to synthetic fuel
projects in Western Hemisphere outside United States may be disapproved by
resolution of either House;) (President's request to suspend provisions
requiring build up of reserves and limiting sale or disposal of certain crude
oil reserves must be approved by resolution of both Houses).

E.

RULEMAKING

209

27\. Education Amendments of 1974, Pub.L. No. 93-380, § 509, 88 Stat. 484,
567, 20 U.S.C. 1232(d)(1) (Department of Education regulations may be
disapproved by concurrent resolution).

210

28\. Federal Education Campaign Act Amendments of 1979, Pub.L. No. 96-187, §
109, 93 Stat. 1339, 1364, 2 U.S.C. 438(d)(2) (Supp. III 1979) (Proposed rules
and regulations of the Federal Election Commission may be disapproved by
resolution of either House).

211

29\. Act of January 2, 1975, Pub.L. No. 93-595, § 2, 88 Stat. 1926, 1948, 28
U.S.C. 2076 (Proposed amendments by Supreme Court of Federal Rules of Evidence
may be disapproved by resolution of either House).

212

30\. Act of August 9, 1975, Pub.L. No. 94-88, § 208, 89 Stat. 433, 436-37, 42
U.S.C. 602 note (Social Security standards proposed by Secretary of Health and
Human Services may be disapproved by either House).

213

31\. Airline Deregulation Act of 1978, Pub.L. No. 95-504, § 43(f)(3), 92 Stat.
1705, 1752, 49 U.S.C. 1552(f) (Supp. III 1979) (Rules or regulations governing
employee protection program may be disapproved by resolution of either House).

214

32\. Education Amendments of 1978, Pub.L. No. 95-561, §§ 1138, 1212, 1409, 92
Stat. 2143, 2327, 2341, 2341, 2369, 25 U.S.C. 2018, 20 U.S.C. [927] 1221-3(e)
(Supp. III 1979) (Rules and regulations proposed under the Act may be
disapproved by concurrent resolution).

215

33\. Civil Rights of Institutionalized Persons Act, Pub.L. No. 96-247, §
7(b)(1), 94 Stat. 349, 352-355 (1980) (to be codified in 42 U.S.C. 1997e)
(Attorney General's proposed standards for resolution of grievances of adults
confined in correctional facilities may be disapproved by resolution of either
House).

216

34\. Federal Trade Commission Improvements Act of 1980, Pub.L. No. 96-252, §
21(a), 94 Stat. 374, 393 (to be codified in 15 U.S.C. 57a-1) (Federal Trade
Commission rules may be disapproved by concurrent resolution).

217

35\. Department of Education Organization Act, Pub.L. No. 96-88, § 414(b), 93
Stat. 668, 685 (1979), 20 U.S.C. 3474 (Supp. III 1979) (Rules and regulations
promulgated with respect to the various functions, programs and
responsibilities transferred by this Act, may be disapproved by concurrent
resolution).

218

36\. Multiemployer Pension Plan Amendments Act of 1980, Pub.L. No. 96-364, §
102, 94 Stat. 1208, 1213 (to be codified in 29 U.S.C. 1322a) (Schedules
proposed by Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) which requires an
increase in premiums must be approved by concurrent resolution;) (revised
premium schedules for voluntary supplemental coverage proposed by PBGC may be
disapproved by concurrent resolution).

219

37\. Farm Credit Act Amendments of 1980, Pub.L. No. 96-592, § 508, 94 Stat.
3437, 3450 (to be codified in 12 U.S.C. 2121 [2252] ) (Certain Farm Credit
Administration regulations or delayed by resolution of either House.)

220

38\. Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of
1980, Pub.L. No. 96-510, § 305, 94 Stat. 2767, 2809 (to be codified in 42
U.S.C. 9655) (Environmental Protection Agency regulations concerning hazardous
substances releases, liability and compensation may be disapproved by
concurrent resolution or by the adoption of either House of a concurrent
resolution which is not disapproved by the other House).

221

39\. National Historic Preservation Act Amendments of 1980, Pub.L. No. 96-515,
§ 501, 94 Stat. 2987, 3004 (to be codified in 16 U.S.C. 470w-6) (Regulation
proposed by the Secretary of the Interior may be disapproved by concurrent
resolution).

222

40\. Coastal Zone Management Improvement Act of 1980, Pub.L. No. 96-464, § 12,
94 Stat. 2060, 2067 (to be codified in 16 U.S.C. 1463a) (Rules proposed by the
Secretary of Commerce may be disapproved by concurrent resolution).

223

41\. Act of December 17, 1980, Pub.L. No. 96-539, § 4, 94 Stat. 3194, 3195 (to
be codified in 7 U.S.C. 136w) (Rules or regulations promulgated by the
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act may be disapproved by concurrent
resolution).

224

42\. Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, Pub.L. No. 97-35, §§
533(a)(2), 1107(d), 1142, 1183(a)(2), 1207, 95 Stat. 357, 453, 626, 654, 659,
695, 718-20 (to be codified in 20 U.S.C. 1089, 23 U.S.C. 402(j), 45 U.S.C.
761, 767, 564(c)(3), 15 U.S.C. 2083, 1276, 1204) (Secretary of Education's
schedule of expected family contributions for Pell Grant recipients may be
disapproved by resolution of either House;) (rules promulgated by Secretary of
Transportation for programs to reduce accidents, injuries and deaths may be
disapproved by resolution of either House;) (Secretary of Transportation's
plan for the sale of government's common stock in rail system may be
disapproved by concurrent resolution;) (Secretary of Transportation's approval
of freight transfer agreements may be disapproved by resolution of either
House;) (amendments to Amtrak's Route and Service Criteria may be disapproved
by resolution of either House;) (Consumer Product Safety Commission
regulations may be disapproved by concurrent resolution of both Houses, or by
concurrent resolution of disapproval by either House if such resolution is not
disapproved by the other House).

F.

MISCELLANEOUS

225

43\. Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950, Pub.L. No. 81-920, § 201, 64 Stat.
1245, 1248, 50 app. U.S.C. 2281(g) (Interstate civil defense compacts may be
disapproved by concurrent resolution).

226

44\. National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, Pub.L. No. 85-568, § 302c
[302(c) ] 72 Stat. 426, 433, 42 U.S.C. 2453 (President's transfer to National
Air and Space Administration of functions of other departments and agencies
may be disapproved by concurrent resolution).

227

45\. Federal Pay Comparability Act of 1970, Pub.L. No. 91-656, § 3, 84 Stat.
1946, 1949, 5 U.S.C. 5305 (President's alternative pay plan may be disapproved
by resolution of either House).

228

46\. Act of October 19, 1973, Pub.L. No. 93-134, § 5, 87 Stat. 466, 468, 25
U.S.C. 1405 (Plan for use and distribution of funds paid in satisfaction of
judgment of Indian Claims Commission or Court of Claims may be disapproved by
resolution of either House).

229

47\. Menominee Restoration Act, Pub.L. No. 93-197, § 6, 87 Stat. 770, 773
(1973), 25 U.S.C. 903d(b) (Plan by Secretary of the Interior for assumption of
the assets the Menominee Indian corporation may be disapproved by resolution
of either House).

230

48\. District of Columbia Self-Government and Governmental Reorganization Act,
Pub.L. No. 93-198, §§ 303, 602(c)(1) and (2), 87 Stat. 774, 784, 814 (1973)
(District of Columbia Charter amendments ratified by electors must be approved
by concurrent resolution;) (acts of District of Columbia Council may be
disapproved by concurrent resolution;) (acts of District of Columbia Council
under certain titles of D.C.Code may be disapproved by resolution of either
House).

231

49\. Act of December 31, 1975, Pub.L. No. 94-200, § 102, 89 Stat. 1124, 12
U.S.C. 461 note (Federal Reserve System Board of Governors may not eliminate
or reduce interest rate differentials between banks insured by Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation and associations insured by Federal Savings and Loan
Insurance Corporations without concurrent resolution of approval).

232

50\. Veterans' Education and Employment Assistance Act of 1976, Pub.L. No.
94-502, § 408, 90 Stat. 2383, 2397-98, 38 U.S.C. 1621 note (President's
recommendation for continued enrollment period in Armed Forces educational
assistance program may be disapproved by resolution of either House).

233

51\. Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, Pub.L. No. 94-579, §§
203(c), 204(c)(1), 90 Stat. 2743, 2750, 2752, 43 U.S.C. 1713(c), 1714 (Sale of
public lands in excess of two thousand five hundred acres and withdrawal of
public lands aggregating five thousand acres or more may be disapproved by
concurrent resolution).

234

52\. Emergency Unemployment Compensation Extension Act of 1977, Pub.L. No.
95-19, § 401, 91 Stat. 39, 45, 2 U.S.C. 359 (Supp. III 1979) (President's
recommendations regarding rates of salary payment may be disapproved by
resolution of either House).

235

53\. Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, Pub.L. No. 95-454, § 515 [415] 92 Stat.
1111, 1179, 5 U.S.C. 3131 note (Supp. III 1979) (Continuation of Senior
Executive Service may be disapproved by concurrent resolution).

236

54\. Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978, Pub.L. No. 95-523, §
304(b), 92 Stat. 1887, 1906, 31 U.S.C. 1322 (Supp. III 1979) (Presidential
timetable for reducing unemployment may be superseded by concurrent
resolution).

237

55\. District of Columbia Retirement Reform Act, Pub.L. No. 96-122, § 164, 93
Stat. 866, 891-92 (1979) (Required reports to Congress on the District of
Columbia retirement program may be rejected by resolution of either House).

238

56\. Act of August 29, 1980, Pub.L. No. 96-332, § 2, 94 Stat. 1057, 1058 (to
be codified in 16 U.S.C. 1432) (Designation of marine sanctuary by the
Secretary of Commerce may be disapproved by concurrent resolution).

239

Justice REHNQUIST, with whom Justice WHITE joins, dissenting.

240

A severability clause creates a presumption that Congress intended the valid
portion of the statute to remain in force when one part is found to be
invalid. _Carter v. Carter Coal Co.,_ 298 U.S. 238, 312, 56 S.Ct. 855, 873, 80
L.Ed. 1160 (1936); _Champlin Refining Co. v. Corporation Comm'n,_ 286 U.S.
210, 235, 52 S.Ct. 559, 565, 76 L.Ed. 1062 (1932). A severability clause does
not, however, conclusively resolve the issue. "[T]he determination, in the
end, is reached by" asking "[w]hat was the intent of the lawmakers," _Carter,
supra,_ 298 U.S., at 312, 56 S.Ct., at 873, and "will rarely turn on the
presence or absence of such a clause." _United States v. Jackson,_ 390 U.S.
570, 585, n. 27, 88 S.Ct. 1209, 1218, n. 27, 20 L.Ed.2d 138 (1968). Because I
believe that Congress did not intend the one-House veto provision of §
244(c)(2) to be severable, I dissent.

241

Section 244(c)(2) is an exception to the general rule that an alien's
deportation shall be suspended when the Attorney General finds that statutory
criteria are met. It is severable only if Congress would have intended to
permit the Attorney General to suspend deportations without it. This Court has
held several times over the years that exceptions such as this are not
severable because

242

"by rejecting the exceptions intended by the legislature . . . the statute is
made to enact what confessedly the legislature never meant. It confers upon
the statute a positive operation beyond the legislative intent, and beyond
what anyone can say it would have enacted in view of the illegality of the
exceptions." _Spraigue v. Thompson,_ 118 U.S. 90, 95, 6 S.Ct. 988, 990, 30
L.Ed. 115 (1886).

243

By severing § 244(c)(2), the Court permits suspension of deportation in a
class of cases where Congress never stated that suspension was appropriate. I
do not believe we should expand the statute in this way without some clear
indication that Congress intended such an expansion. As the Court said in
_Davis v. Wallace,_ 257 U.S. 478, 484-485, 42 S.Ct. 164, 166, 66 L.Ed. 325
(1922):

244

"Where an excepting provision in a statute is found unconstitutional, courts
very generally hold that this does not work an enlargement of the scope or
operation of other provisions with which that provision was enacted and which
was intended to qualify or restrain. The reasoning on which the decisions
proceed is illustra ed in _State Ex Rel. McNeal v. Dombaugh,_ 20 Ohio St. 167,
174. In dealing with a contention that a statute containing an
unconstitutional provision should be construed as if the remainder stood
alone, the court there said: 'This would be to mutilate the section and garble
its meaning. The legislative intention must not be confounded with their power
to carry that intention into effect. To refuse to give force and vitality to a
provision of law is one thing, and to refuse to read it is a very different
thing. It is by a mere figure of speech that we say an unconstitutional
provision of a statute is "stricken out." For all the purposes of construction
it is to be regarded as part of the act. The meaning of the legislature must
be gathered from all that they have said, as well from that which is
ineffectual for want of power, as from that which is authorized by law.'

245

Here the excepting provision was in the statute when it was enacted, and there
can be no doubt that the legislature intended that the meaning of the other
provisions should be taken as restricted accordingly. Only with that
restricted meaning did they receive the legislative sanction which was
essential to make them part of the statute law of the State; and no other
authority is competent to give them a larger application."

246

See also _Frost v. Corporation Comm'n,_ 278 U.S. 515, 525, 49 S.Ct. 235, 239,
73 L.Ed. 483 (1929).

247

The Court finds that the legislative history of § 244 shows that Congress
intended § 244(c)(2) to be severable because Congress wanted to relieve itself
of the burden of private bills. But the history elucidated by the Court shows
that Congress was unwilling to give the Executive Branch permission to suspend
deportation on its own. Over the years, Congress consistently rejected
requests from the Executive for complete discretion in this area. Congress
always insisted on retaining ultimate control, whether by concurrent
resolution, as in the 1948 Act, or by one-House veto, as in the present Act.
Congress has never indicated that it would be willing to permit suspensions of
deportation unless it could retain some sort of veto.

248

It is doubtless true that Congress has the power to provide for suspensions of
deportation without a one-House veto. But the Court has failed to identify any
evidence that Congress intended to exercise that power. On the contrary,
Congress' continued insistence on retaining control of the suspension process
indicates that it has never been disposed to give the Executive Branch a free
hand. By severing § 244(c)(2) the Court has "confounded" Congress' "intention"
to permit suspensions of deportation "with their power to carry that intention
into effect." _Davis, supra,_ 257 U.S., at 484, 42 S.Ct., at 166, quoting
_Dombaugh, supra,_ at 174.

249

Because I do not believe that § 244(c)(2) is severable, I would reverse the
judgment of the Court of Appeals.

1

Congress delegated the major responsibilities for enforcement of the
Immigration and Nationality Act to the Attorney General. 8 U.S.C. § 1103(a).
The Attorney General discharges his responsibilities through the Immigration
and Naturalization Service, a division of the Department of Justice. _Ibid._

2

In constitutional terms, "veto" is used to describe the President's power
under Art. I, § 7 of the Constitution. See Black's Law Dictionary 1403 (5th
ed. 1979). It appears, however, that Congressional devices of the type
authorized by § 244(c)(2) have come to be commonly referred to as a "veto."
See, _e.g.,_ Martin, The Legislative Veto and the Responsible Exercise of
Congressional Power, 68 Va.L.Rev. 253 (1982); Miller and Knapp, The
Congressional Veto: Preserving the Constitutional Framework, 52 Ind.L.J. 367
(1977). We refer to the Congressional "resolution" authorized by § 244(c)(2)
as a "one-House veto" of the Attorney General's decision to allow a particular
deportable alien to remain in the United States.

3

It is not at all clear whether the House generally, or Subcommittee Chairman
Eilberg in particular, correctly understood the relationship between H.R.Res.
926 and the Attorney General's decision to suspend Chadha's deportation.
Exactly one year previous to the House veto of the Attorney General's decision
in this case, Representative Eilberg introduced a similar resolution
disapproving the Attorney General's suspension of deportation in the case of
six other aliens. H.R.Res. 1518, 93d Cong., 2d Sess. The following colloquy
occurred on the floor of the House:

"Mr. WYLIE. Mr. Speaker, further reserving the right to object, is this
procedure to expedite the ongoing operations of the Department of Justice, as
far as these people are concerned. Is it in any way contrary to whatever
action the Attorney General has taken on the question of deportation; does the
gentleman know?

Mr. EILBERG. Mr. Speaker, the answer is no to the gentleman's final question.
These aliens have been found to be deportable and the Special Inquiry
Officer's decision denying suspension of deportation has been reversed by the
Board of Immigration Appeals. We are complying with the law since all of these
decisions have been referred to us for approval or disapproval, and there are
hundreds of cases in this category. In these six cases however, we believe it
would be grossly improper to allow these people to acquire the status of
permanent resident aliens.

Mr. WYLIE. In other words, the gentleman has been working with the Attorney
General's office?

Mr. EILBERG. Yes.

Mr. WYLIE. This bill then is in fact a confirmation of what the Attorney
General intends to do?

Mr. EILBERG. The gentleman is correct insofar as it relates to the
determination of deportability which has been made by the Department of
Justice in these cases.

Mr. WYLIE. Mr. Speaker, I withdraw my reservation of objection." 120 Cong.Rec.
41412 (1974).

Clearly, this was an obfuscation of the effect of a veto under § 244(c)(2).
Such a veto in no way constitutes "a confirmation of what the Attorney General
intends to do." To the contrary, such a resolution was meant to overrule and
set aside, or "veto," the Attorney General's determination that, in a
particular case, cancellation of deportation would be appropriate under the
standards set forth in § 244(a)(1).

4

Nine Members of the House of Representatives disagree with the position taken
in the briefs filed by the Senate and the House of Representatives and have
filed a brief _amicus curiae_ urging that the decision of the Court of Appeals
be affirmed in this case.

5

The Senate and House authorized intervention in this case, S.Res. 40 and
H.R.Res. 49, 97th Cong., 1st Sess. (1981), and, on February 3, 1981, filed
motions to intervene and petitioned for rehearing. The Court of Appeals
granted the motions to intervene. Both Houses are therefore proper "parties"
within the meaning of that term in 28 U.S.C. § 1254(1). See _Batterton v.
Francis,_ 432 U.S. 416, 424, n. 7, 97 S.Ct. 2399, 2405, n. 7, 53 L.Ed.2d 448
(1977).

6

In addition to meeting the statutory requisites of § 1252, of course, an
appeal must present a justiciable case or controversy under Art. III. Such a
controversy clearly exists in No. 80-1832, as in the other two cases, because
of the presence of the two Houses of Congress as adverse parties. See _infra,_
at 939; see also _Director, OWCP v. Perini North River Associates,_ \--- U.S.
----, ----, 103 S.Ct. 634, 641, 74 L.Ed.2d 465 (1982).

7

In this case we deem it appropriate to address questions of severability
first. But see _Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 108-109, 96 S.Ct. 612, 677-678,
46 L.Ed.2d 659 (1976); _United States v. Jackson,_ 390 U.S. 570, 585, 88 S.Ct.
1209, 1218, 20 L.Ed.2d 138 (1968).

8

Without the provision for one-House veto, Congress would presumably retain the
power, during the time allotted in § 244(c)(2), to enact a law, in accordance
with the requirements of Article I of the Constitution, mandating a particular
alien's deportation, unless, of course, other constitutional principles place
substantive limitations on such action. Cf. Attorney General Jackson's attack
on H.R. 9766, 76th Cong., 3d Sess. (1940), a bill to require the Attorney
General to deport an individual alien. The Attorney General called the bill
"an historical departure from an unbroken American practice and tradition. It
would be the first time that an act of Congress singled out a named individual
for deportation." S.Rep. No. 2031, 76th Cong., 3d Sess. 9 (1940) (reprinting
Jackson's letter of June 18, 1940). See n. 17, _infra._

9

Without the one-House veto, § 244 resembles the "report and wait" provision
approved by the Court in _Sibbach v. Wilson,_ 312 U.S. 1, 61 S.Ct. 422, 85
L.Ed. 479 (1941). The statute examined in _Sibbach_ provided that the newly
promulgated Federal Rules of Civil Procedure "shall not take effect until they
shall have been reported to Congress by the Attorney General at the beginning
of a regular session thereof and until after the close of such session." Act
of June 19, 1934, ch. 651, § 2, 48 Stat. 1064. This statute did _not_ provide
that Congress could unilaterally veto the Federal Rules. Rather, it gave
Congress the opportunity to review the Rules before they became effective and
to pass legislation barring their effectiveness if the Rules were found
objectionable. This technique was used by Congress when it acted in 1973 to
stay, and ultimately to revise, the proposed Rules of Evidence. _Compare_ Act
of March 30, 1973, Pub.L. No. 93-12, 87 Stat. 9, _with_ Act of Jan. 2, 1975,
Pub.L. 93-595, 88 Stat. 1926.

10

Depending on how the INS interprets its statutory duty under § 244 apart from
the challenged portion of § 244(c)(2), Chadha's status may be retroactively
adjusted to that of a permanent resident as of December 19, 1975--the last
session in which Congress could have attempted to stop the suspension of
Chadha's deportation from ripening into cancellation of deportation. See 8
U.S.C. § 1254(d). In that event, Chadha's five-year waiting period to become a
citizen under § 316(a) of the Act, 8 U.S.C. § 1427(a), would have elapsed.

11

Under the Third Circuit's reasoning, judicial review under § 106(a) would not
extend to the constitutionality of § 244(c)(2) because that issue could not
have been tested during the administrative deportation proceedings conducted
under § 242(b). _Dastmalchi v. INS,_ 660 F.2d 880 (CA3 1981). The facts in
_Dastmalchi_ are distinguishable, however. In _Dastmalchi,_ Iranian aliens who
had entered the United States on nonimmigrant student visas challenged a
regulation that required them to report to the District Director of the INS
during the Iranian hostage crisis. The aliens reported and were ordered
deported after a § 242(b) proceeding. The aliens in _Dastmalchi_ could have
been deported irrespective of the challenged regulation. Here, in contrast,
Chadha's deportation would have been _cancelled_ but for § 242(c)(2).

12

A relevant parallel can be found in our recent decision in _Bob Jones
University v. United States,_ \--- U.S. ----, 103 S.Ct. 2017, 76 L.Ed.2d 157
(1983). There, the United States agreed with Bob Jones University and
Goldsboro Christian Schools that certain Revenue Rulings denying tax exempt
status to schools that discriminated on the basis of race were invalid.
Despite its agreement with the schools, however, the United States was
complying with a court order enjoining it from granting tax-exempt status to
any school that discriminated on the basis of race. Even though the government
largely agreed with the opposing party on the merits of the controversy, we
found an adequate basis for jurisdiction in the fact that the government
intended to enforce the challenged law against that party. See _id.,_ at ----
n. 9, 103 S.Ct., at 2025 n. 9.

13

The suggestion is made that § 244(c)(2) is somehow immunized from
constitutional scrutiny because the Act containing § 244(c)(2) was passed by
Congress and approved by the President. _Marbury v. Madison,_ 1 Cranch 137, 2
L.Ed. 60 (1803), resolved that question. The assent of the Executive to a bill
which contains a provision contrary to the Constitution does not shield it
from judicial review. See _Smith v. Maryland,_ 442 U.S. 735, 740 n. 5, 99
S.Ct. 2577, 2580, n. 5, 61 L.Ed.2d 220 (1979); _National League of Cities v.
Usery,_ 426 U.S. 833, 841 n. 12, 96 S.Ct. 2465, 2469 n. 12, 49 L.Ed.2d 245
(1976); _Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 96 S.Ct. 612, 46 L.Ed.2d 659 (1976);
_Myers v. United States,_ 272 U.S. 52, 47 S.Ct. 21, 71 L.Ed. 160 (1926). See
also n. 22, _infra._ In any event, eleven Presidents, from Mr. Wilson through
Mr. Reagan, who have been presented with this issue have gone on record at
some point to challenge Congressional vetoes as unconstitutional. See Henry,
The Legislative Veto: In Search of Constitutional Limits, 16 Harv.J.Legis.
735, 737-738 n. 7 (1979) (collecting citations to presidential statements).
Perhaps the earliest Executive expression on the constitutionality of the
Congressional veto is found in Attorney General William D. Mitchell's opinion
of January 24, 1933 to President Hoover. 37 Op.Atty.Gen. 56 (1933).
Furthermore, it is not uncommon for Presidents to approve legislation
containing parts which are objectionable on constitutional grounds. For
example, after President Roosevelt signed the Lend-Lease Act of 1941, Attorney
General Jackson released a memorandum explaining the President's view that the
provision allowing the Act's authorization to be terminated by concurrent
resolution was unconstitutional. Jackson, A Presidential Legal Opinion, 66
Harv.L.Rev. 1353 (1953).

14

The widespread approval of the delegates was commented on by Joseph Story:

"In the convention there does not seem to have been much diversity of opinion
on the subject of the propriety of giving to the president a negative on the
laws. The principal points of discuss on seem to have been, whether the
negative should be absolute, or qualified; and if the latter, by what number
of each house the bill should subsequently be passed, in order to become a
law; and whether the negative should in either case be exclusively vested in
the president alone, or in him jointly with some other department of
government." 1 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States
611 (1858). See 1 M. Farrand, The Records of the Federal Convention of 1787
21, 97-104, 138-140; _id.,_ at 73-80, 181, 298, 301-305.

15

The Great Compromise was considered so important by the Framers that they
inserted a special provision to ensure that it could not be altered, even by
constitutional amendment, except with the consent of the states affected. See
U.S. Const. Art. V.

16

Congress protests that affirming the Court of Appeals in this case will
sanction "lawmaking by the Attorney General. . . . Why is the Attorney General
exemp from submitting his proposed changes in the law to the full bicameral
process?" Brief of the United States House of Representatives 40. To be sure,
some administrative agency action--rule making, for example--may resemble
"lawmaking." See 5 U.S.C. § 551(4), which defines an agency's "rule" as "the
whole or part of an agency statement of general or particular applicability
and future effect designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe _law_ or
policy. . . ." This Court has referred to agency activity as being "quasi-
legislative" in character. _Humphrey's Executor v. United States,_ 295 U.S.
602, 628, 55 S.Ct. 869, 874, 79 L.Ed. 1611 (1935). Clearly, however, "[i]n the
framework of our Constitution, the President's power to see that the laws are
faithfully executed refutes the idea that he is to be a lawmaker." _Youngstown
Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,_ 343 U.S. 579, 587, 72 S.Ct. 863, 867, 96 L.Ed.
1153 (1952). See _Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 123, 96 S.Ct. 612, 684, 46
L.Ed.2d 659 (1976). When the Attorney General performs his duties pursuant to
§ 244, he does not exercise "legislative" power. See _Ernst & Ernst v.
Hochfelder,_ 425 U.S. 185, 213-214, 96 S.Ct. 1375, 1391, 47 L.Ed.2d 668
(1976). The bicameral process is not necessary as a check on the Executive's
administration of the laws because his administrative activity cannot reach
beyond the limits of the statute that created it--a statute duly enacted
pursuant to Art. I, §§ 1, 7. The constitutionality of the Attorney General's
execution of the authority delegated to him by § 244 involves only a question
of delegation doctrine. The courts, when a case or controversy arises, can
always "ascertain whether the will of Congress has been obeyed," _Yakus v.
United States,_ 321 U.S. 414, 425, 64 S.Ct. 660, 668, 88 L.Ed. 834 (1944), and
can enforce adherence to statutory standards. See _Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co.
v. Sawyer,_ 343 U.S. 579, 585, 72 S.Ct. 863, 865-866, 96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952);
_Ethyl Corp. v. EPA,_ 541 F.2d 1, 68 (CADC) (en banc) (separate statement of
Leventhal, J.), _cert. denied,_ 426 U.S. 941, 96 S.Ct. 2662, 49 L.Ed.2d 394
(1976); L. Jaffe, Judicial Control of Administrative Action 320 (1965). It is
clear, therefore, that the Attorney General acts in his presumptively Art. II
capacity when he administers the Immigration and Nationality Act. Executive
action under legislatively delegated authority that might resemble
"legislative" action in some respects is not subject to the approval of both
Houses of Congress and the President for the reason that the Constitution does
not so require. That kind of Executive action is always subject to check by
the terms of the legislation that authorized it; and if that authority is
exceeded it is open to judicial review as well as the power of Congress to
modify or revoke the authority entirely. A one-House veto is clearly
legislative in both character and effect and is not so checked; the need for
the check provided by Art. I, §§ 1, 7 is therefore clear. Congress' authority
to delegate portions of its power to administrative agencies provides no
support for the argument that Congress can constitutionally control
administration of the laws by way of a Congressional veto.

17

We express no opinion as to whether such legislation would violate any
constitutional provision. See note 8, _supra._

18

During the Convention of 1787, the application of the President's veto to
repeals of statutes was addressed and the Framers were apparently content with
Madison's comment that "[a]s to the difficulty of repeals, it was probable
that in doubtful cases the policy would soon take place of limiting the
duration of laws as to require renewal instead of repeal." 2 M. Farrand,
_supra,_ at 587. See Ginnane, The Control of Federal Administration by
Congressional Resolutions and Committees, 66 Harv.L.Rev. 569, 587-599 (1953).
There is no provision allowing Congress to repeal or amend laws by other than
legislative means pursuant to Art. I.

19

This does not mean that Congress is required to capitulate to "the accretion
of policy control by forces outside its chambers." Javits and Klein,
Congressional Oversight and the Legislative Veto: A Constitutional Analysis,
52 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 455, 462 (1977). The Constitution provides Congress with
abundant means to oversee and control its administrative creatures. Beyond the
obvious fact that Congress ultimately controls administrative agencies in the
legislation that creates them, other means of control, such as durational
limits on authorizations and formal reporting requirements, lie well within
Congress' constitutional power. See _id.,_ at 460-461; Kaiser, Congressional
Action to Overturn Agency Rules: Alternatives to the "Legislative Veto", 32
Ad.L.Rev. 667 (1980). See also note 9, _supra._

20

An exception from the Presentment Clauses was ratified in _Hollingsworth v.
Virginia,_ 3 Dall. 378, 1 L.Ed. 644 (1798). There the Court held presidential
approval was unnecessary for a proposed constitutional amendment

which had passed both Houses of Congress by the requisite two-thirds majority.
See U.S. Const. Art. V.

One might also incl de another "exception" to the rule that Congressional
action having the force of law be subject to the bicameral requirement and the
Presentment Clauses. Each House has the power to act alone in determining
specified internal matters. Art. I, § 7, cls. 2, 3, and § 5, cl. 2. However,
this "exception" only empowers Congress to bind itself and is noteworthy only
insofar as it further indicates the Framers' intent that Congress not act in
any legally binding manner outside a closely circumscribed legislative arena,
except in specific and enumerated instances.

Although the bicameral check was not provided for in any of these provisions
for independent Congressional action, precautionary alternative checks are
evident. For example, Art. II, § 2 requires that two-thirds of the Senators
present concur in the Senate's consent to a treaty, rather than the simple
majority required for passage of legislation. See The Federalist No. 64 (J.
Jay); The Federalist No. 66 (A. Hamilton); The Federalist No. 75 (A.
Hamilton). Similarly, the Framers adopted an alternative protection, in the
stead of Presidential veto and bicameralism, by requiring the concurrence of
two-thirds of the Senators present for a conviction of impeachment. Art. I, §
3\. We also note that the Court's holding in _Hollingsworth, supra,_ that a
resolution proposing an amendment to the Constitution need not be presented to
the President, is subject to two alternative protections. First, a
constitutional amendment must command the votes of two-thirds of each House.
Second, three-fourths of the states must ratify any amendment.

21

Justice POWELL's position is that the one-House veto in this case is a
_judicial_ act and therefore unconstitutional as beyond the authority vested
in Congress by the Constitution. We agree that there is a sense in which one-
House action pursuant to § 244(c)(2) has a judicial cast, since it purports to
"review" Executive action. In this case, for example, the sponsor of the
resolution vetoing the suspension of Chadha's deportation argued that Chadha
"did not meet [the] statutory requirements" for suspension of deportation.
_Ante,_ at 926. To be sure, it is normally up to the courts to decide whether
an agency has complied with its statutory mandate. See note 16, _supra._ But
the attempted analogy between judicial action and the one-House veto is less
than perfect. Federal courts do not enjoy a roving mandate to correct alleged
excesses of administrative agencies; we are limited by Art. III to hearing
cases and controversies and no justiciable case or controversy was presented
by the Attorney General's decision to allow Chadha to remain in this country.
We are aware of no decision, and Justice POWELL has cited none, where a
federal court has reviewed a decision of the Attorney General suspending
deportation of an alien pursuant to the standards set out in § 244(a)(1). This
is not surprising, given that no party to such action has either the
motivation or the right to appeal from it. A Justice WHITE correctly notes,
_post,_ at 1001-1002, "the courts have not been given the authority to review
whether an alien should be given permanent status; review is limited to
whether the Attorney General has properly applied the statutory standards for"
_denying_ a request for suspension of deportation. _Foti v. INS,_ 375 U.S.
217, 84 S.Ct. 306, 11 L.Ed.2d 281 (1963), relied on by Justice POWELL,
addressed only "whether a refusal by the Attorney General to grant a
suspension of deportation is one of these 'final orders of deportation' of
which direct review by Courts of Appeals is authorized under § 106(a) of the
Act." _Id.,_ at 221, 84 S.Ct., at 309. Thus, Justice POWELL's statement that
the one-House veto in this case is "clearly adjudicatory," _post,_ at 965,
simply is not supported by his accompanying assertion that the House has
"assumed a function ordinarily entrusted to the federal courts." _Ibid._ We
are satisfied that the one-House veto is legislative in purpose and effect and
subject to the procedures set out in Art. I.

22

Neither can we accept the suggestion that the one-House veto provision in §
244(c)(2) either removes or modifies the bicameralism and presentation
requirements for the enactment of future legislation affecting aliens. See
_Atkins v. United States,_ 556 F.2d 1028, 1063-1064 (Ct.Cl.1977), cert.
denied, 434 U.S. 1009, 98 S.Ct. 718, 54 L.Ed.2d 751 (1978); Brief for the
United States House of Representatives 40. The explicit prescription for
legislative action contained in Art. I cannot be amended by legislation. See
n. 13, _supra._

Justice WHITE suggests that the Attorney General's action under § 244(c)(1)
suspending deportation is equivalent to a _proposal_ for legislation and that
because Congressional approval is indicated "by failure to veto, the one-House
veto satisfies the requirement of bicameral approval." _Post,_ at 997.
However, as the Court of Appeals noted, that approach "would analogize the
effect of the one house disapproval to the failure of one house to vote
affirmatively on a private bill." 634 F.2d, at 435. Even if it were clear that
Congress entertained such an arcane theory when it enacted § 244(c)(2), which
Justice WHITE does not suggest, this would amount to nothing less than an
amending of Art. I. The legislative steps outlined in Art. I are not empty
formalities; they were designed to assure that both Houses of Congress and the
President participate in the exercise of lawmaking authority. This does not
mean that legislation must always be preceded by debate; on the contrary, we
have said that it is not necessary for a legislative body to "articulate its
reasons for enacting a statute." _United States Railroad Retirement Board v.
Fritz,_ 449 U.S. 166, 179, 101 S.Ct. 453, 461, 66 L.Ed.2d 368 (1980). But the
steps required by Art. I, §§ 1, 7 make certain that there is an opportunity
for deliberation and debate. To allow Congress to evade the strictures of the
Constitution and in effect enact Executive proposals into law by mere silence
cannot be squared with Art. I.

1

As Justice WHITE's dissenting opinion explains, the legislative veto has been
included in a wide variety of statutes, ranging from bills for executive
reorganization to the War Powers Resolution. See _post,_ at 968-972. Whether
the veto complies with the Presentment Clauses may well turn on the particular
context in which it is exercised, and I would be hesitant to conclude that
every veto is unconstitutional on the basis of the unusual example presented
by this litigation.

2

See Martin, The Legislative Veto and The Responsible Exercise of Congressional
Power, 68 Va.L.Rev. 253 (1982); _Consumer Energy Council of America v. FERC,_
\--- U.S.App.D.C. ----, ----, 673 F.2d 425, 475 (1982).

3

Jefferson later questioned the degree to which the Constitution insulates the
judiciary. See D. Malone, Jefferson the President: Second Term, 1805-1809, pp.
304-305 (1974). In response to Chief Justice Marshall's rulings during Aaron
Burr's trial, Jefferson stated that the judiciary had favored Burr--whom
Jefferson viewed as clearly guilty of treason--at the expense of the country.
He predicted that the people "will see and amend the error in our
Constitution, which makes any branch independent of the nation." _Id.,_ at 305
(quoting Jefferson's letter to William Giles). The very controversy that
attended Burr's trial, however, demonstrates the wisdom in providing a neutral
forum, removed from political pressure, for the determination of one person's
rights.

4

The House and the Senate argue that the legislative veto does not prevent the
executive from exercising its constitutionally assigned function. Even
assuming this argument is correct, it does not address the concern that the
Congress is exercising unchecked judicial power at the expense of individual
liberties. It was precisely to prevent such arbitrary action that the Framers
adopted the doctrine of separation of powers. See, _e.g., Myers v. United
States,_ 272 U.S. 52, 293, 47 S.Ct. 21, 84-85, 71 L.Ed. 160 (1926) (Brandeis,
J., dissenting).

5

The Immigration and Naturalization Service, a division of the Department of
Justice, administers the Immigration and Naturalization Act on behalf of the
Attorney General, who has primary responsibility for the Act's enforcement.
See 8 U.S.C. § 1103\. The Act establishes a detailed administrative procedure
for determining when a specific person is to be deported, see § 1252(b), and
provides for judicial review of this decision, see § 1105a(a); _Foti v. INS,_
375 U.S. 217, 84 S.Ct. 306, 11 L.Ed.2d 281 (1963).

6

Normally the House would have distributed the resolution before acting on it,
see 121 Cong.Rec. 40800 (1975), but the statute providing for the legislative
veto limits the time in which Congress may veto the Service's determination
that deportation should be suspended. See 8 U.S.C. § 1254(c)(2). In this case
Congress had Chadha's report before it for approximately a year and a half,
but failed to act on it until three days before the end of the limitations
period. Accordingly, it was required to abandon its normal procedures for
considering resolutions, thereby increasing the danger of arbitrary and ill-
considered action.

7

The Court concludes that Congress' action was legislative in character because
each branch "presumptively act[s] within its assigned sphere." _Ante,_ at 952.
The Court's presumption provides a useful starting point, but does not
conclude the inquiry. Nor does the fact that the House's action alters an
individual's legal status indicate, as the Court reasons, see _ante,_ at
952-954, that the action is legislative rather than adjudicative in nature. In
determining whether one branch unconstitutionally has assumed a power central
to another branch, the traditional characterization of the assumed power as
legislative, executive, or judicial may provide some guidance. See _Springer
v. Philippine Islands,_ 277 U.S. 189, 203, 48 S.Ct. 480, 482-483, 72 L.Ed. 845
(1928). But reasonable minds may disagree over the character of an act and the
more helpful inquiry, in my view, is whether the act in question raises the
dangers the Framers sought to avoid.

8

The Court reasons in response to this argument that the one-house veto
exercised in this case was not judicial in nature because the decision of the
Immigration and Naturalization Service did not present a justiciable issue
that could have been reviewed by a court on appeal. See _ante,_ at 957, n. 21.
The Court notes that since the administrative agency decided the case in favor
of Chadha, there was no aggrieved party who could appeal. Reliance by the
Court on this fact misses the point. Even if review of the particular decision
to suspend deportation is not committed to the courts, the House of
Representatives assumed a function that generally is entrusted to an impartial
tribunal. In my view, the legislative branch in effect acted as an appellate
court by overruling the Service's application of established law to Chadha.
And unlike a court or an administrative agency, it did not provide Chadha with
the right to counsel or a hearing before acting. Although the parallel is not
entirely complete, the effect on Chadha's personal rights would not have been
different in principle had he been acquitted of a federal crime and thereafter
found by one House of Congress to have been guilty.

9

When Congress grants particular individuals relief or benefits under its
spending power, the danger of oppressive action that the separation of powers
was designed to avoid is not implicated. Similarly, Congress may authorize the
admission of individual aliens by special acts, but it does not follow that
Congress unilaterally may make a judgment that a particular alien has no legal
right to remain in this country. See Memorandum Concerning H.R. 9766 Entitled
"An Act to Direct the Deportation of Harry Renton Bridges," reprinted in
S.Rep. No. 2031, pt. 1, 76th Cong., 3d Sess., 8 (1940). As Attorney General
Robert Jackson remarked, such a practice "would be an historical departure
from an unbroken American practice and tradition." S.Rep. No. 2031, _supra,_
at 9.

10

We have recognized that independent regulatory agencies and departments of the
Executive Branch often exercise authority that is "judicial in nature."
_Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 140-141, 96 S.Ct. 612, 692-693, 46 L.Ed.2d 659
(1976). This function, however, forms part of the agencies' execution of
public law and is subject to the procedural safeguards, including judicial
review, provided by the Administrative Procedure Act, see 5 U.S.C. § 551 _et
seq._ See also n. 5, _supra._

1

As Justice POWELL observes in his separate opinion, "the respect due
[Congress'] judgment as a coordinate branch of Government cautions that our
holding should be no more extensive than necessary to decide the case."
_Ante,_ at 960. The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals also recognized that "We
are not here faced with a situation in which the unforeseeability of future
circumstances or the broad scope and complexity of the subject matter of an
agency's rulemaking authority preclude the articulation of specific criteria
in the governing statute itself. Such factors might present considerations
different from those we find here, both as to the question of separation of
powers and the legitimacy of the unicameral device." 634 F.2d, at 433.

2

A selected list and brief description of these provisions is appended to this
opinion.

3

Watson, Congress Steps Out: A Look at Congressional Control of the Executive,
63 Calif.L.Rev. 983, 1089-1090 (1975) (listing statutes).

4

The Roosevelt Administration submitted proposed legislation containing veto
provisions and defended their constitutionality. See _e.g.,_ General Counsel
to the Office of Price Administration, "Statement on Constitutionality of
Concurrent Resolution Provision of Proposed Price Control Bill (H.R.5479)",
reprinted in Price-Control Bill: Hearings Before the House Comm. on Banking
and Currency on H.R.5479, Part 1, 77th Cong., 1st Sess. 983 (1941).

5

Presidential objections to the veto, until the veto by President Nixon of the
War Powers Resolution, principally concerned bills authorizing committee
vetoes. As the Senate Subcommittee on Separation of Powers found in 1969, "an
accommodation was reached years ago on legislative vetoes exercised by the
entire Congress or by one House, [while] disputes have continued to arise over
the committee form of the veto." S.Rep. No. 549, 91st Cong., 1st Sess., p. 14
(1969). Presidents Kennedy and Johnson proposed enactment of statutes with
legislative veto provisions. See National Wilderness Preservation Act:
Hearings Before the Senate Comm. on Interior and Insular Affairs on S. 4, 88th
Cong., 1st Sess., p. 4 (1963)

(President Kennedy's proposals for withdrawal of wilderness areas);
President's Message to the Congress Transmitting the Budget for Fiscal Year
1970, 5 Weekly Comp.Pres.Doc. 70, 73 (Jan. 15, 1969) (President Johnson's
proposals allowing legislative veto of tax surcharge). The administration of
President Kennedy submitted a memorandum supporting the constitutionality of
the legislative veto. See General Counsel of the Department of Agriculture,
Constitutionality of Title I of H.R.6400, 87th Cong., 1st Session (1961),
reprinted in Legislative Policy of the Bureau of the Budget: Hearing Before
the Subcomm. on Conservation and Credit of the House Comm. on Agriculture,
89th Cong., 2d Sess. 27, 31-32 (1966). During the administration of President
Johnson, the Department of Justice again defended the constitutionality of the
legislative veto provision of the Reorganization Act, as contrasted with
provisions for a committee veto. See Separation of Powers: Hearings Before the
Subcomm. on Separation of Powers of the Senate Comm. on the Judiciary, 90th
Cong. 1st Sess. 206 (1967) (testimony of Frank M. Wozencraft, Assistant
Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel).

6

National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, Pub.L. No. 85-568, § 302, 72 Stat.
426, 433 (space program); Atomic Energy Act Amendment of 1958, Pub.L. No.
85-479, § 4, 72 Stat. 276, 277 (cooperative nuclear agreements); Trade
Expansion Act of 1962, Pub.L. No. 87-794, § 351, 76 Stat. 872, 899, 19 U.S.C.
§ 1981 (tariff recommended by Tariff Commission may be imposed by concurrent
resolution of approval); Postal Revenue and Federal Salary Act of 1976, Pub.L.
No. 90-206, § 255(i)(1), 81 Stat. 613, 644.

7

The Impoundment Control Act's provision for legislative review has been used
extensively. Presidents have submitted hundreds of proposed budget deferrals,
of which 65 have been disapproved by resolutions of the House or Senate with
no protest by the Executive. See Appendix B to Brief on Reargument of U.S.
Senate.

8

The veto appears in a host of broad statutory delegations concerning energy
rationing, contingency plans, strategic oil reserves, allocation of energy
production materials, oil exports, and naval reserve production. Naval
Petroleum Reserves Production Act of 1976, Pub.L. No. 94-258, § 201, 90 Stat.
303, 309, 10 U.S.C. § 7422(c)(2)(C) (naval reserve production); Energy Policy
and Conservation Act, Pub.L. No. 94-163, §§ 159, 201, 401(a), and 455, 89
Stat. 871, 886, 890, 941, and 950 (1975), 42 U.S.C. §§ 6239 and 6261, 15
U.S.C. §§ 757 and 760a (strategic oil reserves, rationing and contingency
plans, oil price controls and product allocation); Federal Nonnuclear Energy
Research and Development Act of 1974, Pub.L. No. 93-577, § 12, 88 Stat. 1878,
1892-93, 42 U.S.C. § 5911 (allocation of energy production materials); Act of
November 16, 1973, Pub.L. No. 93-153, § 10, 87 Stat. 576, 582, 30 U.S.C. §
185(u) (oil exports).

9

Congress found that under the agency's

"very broad authority to prohibit conduct which is 'unfair or deceptive' . . .
the [Federal Trade Commission] FTC can regulate virtually every aspect of
America's commercial life. . . . The FTC's rules are not merely narrow
interpretations of a tightly drawn statute; instead, they are broad policy
pronouncements which Congress has an obligation to study and review."

124 Cong.Rec. 5012 (1978) (statement by Rep. Broyhill). A two-House
legislative veto was added to constrain that broad delegation. Federal Trade
Commission Improvements Act of 1980, § 21(a), 94 Stat. 374, 393, 15 U.S.C. §
57a-1 (Supp. IV 1980). The constitutionality of that provision is presently
pending before us. _United States Senate v. Federal Trade Commission,_ No.
82-935; _United States House of Representatives v. Federal Trade Commission,_
No. 82-1044.

10

While Congress could write certain statutes with greater specificity, it is
unlikely that this is a realistic or even desirable substitute for the
legislative veto. 'Political volatility and the controversy of many issues
would prevent Congress from reaching agreement on many major problems if
specificity were required in their enactments." Fuchs, Administrative Agencies
and the Energy Problem, 47 Ind.L.J. 606, 608 (1972); Stewart, Reformation of
American Administrative Law, 88 Harv.L.Rev. 1667, 1695-1696 (1975). For
example, in the deportation context, the solution is not for Congress to
create more refined categorizations of the deportable aliens whose status
should be subject to change. In 1979, the Immigration and Naturalization
Service proposed regulations setting forth factors to be considered in the
exercise of discretion under numerous provisions of the Act, but not including
§ 244, to ensure "fair and uniform" adjudication "under appropriate
discretionary criteria." 44 Fed.Reg. 36187 (1979). The proposed rule was
canceled in 1981, because "[t]here is an inherent failure in any attempt to
list those factors which should be considered in the exercise of discretion.
It is impossible to list or foresee all of the adverse or favorable factors
which may be present in a given set of circumstances." 46 Fed.Reg. 9119
(1981).

Oversight hearings and congressional investigations have their purpose, but
unless Congress is to be rendered a think tank or debating society, they are
no substitute for the exercise of actual authority. The "laying" procedure
approved in _Sibbach v. Wilson,_ 312 U.S. 1, 15, 61 S.Ct. 422, 427, 85 L.Ed.
479 (1941), while satisfactory for certain measures, has its own shortcomings.
Because a new law must be passed to restrain administrative action, Congress
must delegate authority without the certain ability of being able to check its
exercise.

Finally, the passage of corrective legislation after agency regulations take
effect or Executive Branch officials have acted entail the drawbacks endemic
to a retroactive response. "Post hoc substantive revision of legislation, the
only available corrective mechanism in the absence of post-enactment review
could have serious prejudicial consequences; if Congress retroactively
tampered with a price control system after prices have been set, the economy
could be damaged and private interests seriously impaired; if Congress
rescinded the sale of arms to a foreign country, our relations with that
Country would be severely strained; and if Congress reshuffled the bureaucracy
after a President's reorganization proposal had taken effect, the results
could be chaotic." Javits and Klein, Congressional Oversight and the
Legislative Veto: A Constitutional Analysis, 52 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 455, 464 (1977).

11

Perhaps I am wrong and the Court remains open to consider whether certain
forms of the legislative veto are reconcilable with the Article I
requirements. One possibility for the Court and Congress is to accept that a
resolution of disapproval cannot be given legal effect in its own right, but
may serve as a guide in the interpretation of a delegation of lawmaking
authority. The exercise of the veto could be read as a manifestation of
legislative intent, which, unless itself contrary to the authorizing statute,
serves as the definitive construction of the statute. Therefore, an agency
rule vetoed by Congress would not be enforced in the courts because the veto
indicates that the agency action departs from the Congressional intent.

This limited role for a redefined legislative veto follows in the steps of the
longstanding practice of giving some weight to subsequent legislative reaction
to administrative rulemaking. The silence of Congress after consideration of a
practice by the Executive may be equivalent to acquiescence and consent that
the practice be continued until the power exercised be revoked. _United States
v. Midwest Oil Co.,_ 236 U.S. 459, 460, 472-473, 35 S.Ct. 309, 312-313, 59
L.Ed. 673 (1914). See also _Zemel v. Rusk,_ 381 U.S. 1, 11-12, 85 S.Ct. 1271,
1278-1279, 14 L.Ed.2d 179 (1965) (relying on Congressional failure to repeal
administration interpretation); _Haig v. Agee,_ 453 U.S. 280, 101 S.Ct. 2766,
69 L.Ed.2d 640 (1981) (same); _Bob Jones University v. United States,_ \---
U.S. ----, 103 S.Ct. 2017, 76 L.Ed.2d 157 (1983) (same); _Merrill Lynch,
Pierce, Fenner & Smith v. Curran,_ 456 U.S. 353, 384, 102 S.Ct. 1825, 1842, 72
L.Ed.2d 182 (1982) (relying on failure to disturb judicial decision in later
revision of law).

Reliance on subsequent legislative reaction has been limited by the fear of
overturning the intent of the original Congress and the unreliability of
discerning the views of a subsequent Congress. _Consumer Product Safety
Commission v. GTE Sylvania,_ 447 U.S. 102, 117-118, 100 S.Ct. 2051, 2060-2061,
64 L.Ed.2d 766 (1980); _United States v. Price,_ 361 U.S. 304, 313, 80 S.Ct.
326, 331-332, 4 L.Ed.2d 334 (1960). These concerns are not forceful when the
original statute authorizes subsequent legislative review. The presence of the
review provision constitutes an express authorization for a subsequent
Congress to participate in defining the meaning of the law. Second, the
disapproval resolution allows for a reliable determination of Congressional
intent. Without the review mechanism, uncertainty over the inferences to draw
from subsequent Congressional action is understandable. The refusal to pass an
amendment, for example, may indicate opposition to that position but could
mean that Congress believes the amendment is redundant with the statute as
written. By contrast, the exercise of a legislative veto is an unmistakable
indication that the agency or Executive decision at issue is disfavored. This
is not to suggest that the failure to pass a veto resolution should be given
any weight whatever.

12

For commentary generally favorable to the legislative veto see Abourezk,
Congressional Veto: A Contemporary Response to Executive Encroachment on
Legislative Prerogative, 52 Ind.L.J. 323 (1977); Cooper & Cooper, The
Legislative Veto and the Constitution, 30 Geo.Wash.L.Rev. 467 (1962); Dry, The
Congressional Veto and Constitutional Separation of Powers, in the Presidency
in the Constitutional Order 195 (J. Bessette & J. Tulis eds.); Javits & Klein,
Congressional Oversight and the Legislative Veto: A Constitutional Analysis,
52 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 455 (1977); Miller & Knapp, The Congressional Veto: Preserving
the Constitutional Framework, 52 Ind.L.J. 367 (1977); Nathanson, Separation of
Powers and Administrative Law: Delegation, The Legislative Veto, and the
"Independent" Agencies, 75 Nw.U.L.Rev. 1064 (1981); Newman & Keaton, Congress
and the Faithful Execution of Laws--Should Legislators Supervise
Administrators?, 41 Calif.L.Rev. 565 (1953); Pearson, Oversight: A Vital Yet
Neglected Congressional Function, 23 U.Kan.L.Rev. 277 (1975); Rodino,
Congressional Review of Executive Actions, 5 Seton Hall L.Rev. 489 (1974);
Schwartz, Legislative Veto and the Constitution--A Reexamination, 46
Geo.Wash.L.Rev. 351 (1978); Schwartz, Legislative Control of Administrative
Rules and Regulations: I. The American Experience, 30 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 1031
(1955); Stewart, Constitutionality of the Legislative Veto, 13 Harv.J.Legis.
593 (1976).

For Commentary generally unfavorable to the legislative veto, see J. Bolton,
The Legislative Veto: Unseparating the Powers (1977); Bruff & Gellhorn,
Congressional Control of Administrative Regulation: A Study of Legislative
Vetoes, 90 Harv.L.Rev. 1369 (1977); Dixon, The Congressional Veto and
Separation of Powers: The Executive On a Leash?, 56 N.C.L.Rev. 423 (1978);
Fitzgerald, Congressional Oversight or Congressional Foresight: Guidelines
From the Founding Fathers, 28 Ad.L.Rev. 429 (1976); Ginaane, The Control of
Federal Administration by Congressional Resolutions and Committees, 66
Harv.L.Rev. 569 (1953); Henry, The Legislative Veto: In Search of
Constitutional Limits, 16 Harv.J.Legis. 735 (1979); Martin, The Legislative
Veto and the Responsible Exercise of Congressional Power, 68 Va.L.Rev. 253
(1982); Scalia, The Legislative Veto: A False Remedy For System Overload,
Regulation, Nov.-Dec. 1979, at 19; Watson, Congress Steps Out: A Look at
Congressional Control of the Executive, 63 Calif.L.Rev. 983 (1975); Comment,
Congressional Oversight of Administrative Discretion: Defining the Proper Role
of the Legislative Veto, 26 Am.U.L.Rev. 1018 (1977); Note, Congressional Veto
of Administrative Action: The Probable Response to a Constitutional Challenge,
1976 Duke L.J. 285; Recent Developments, The Legislative Veto in the Arms
Control Act of 1976, 9 Law & Pol'y Int'l Bus. 1029 (1977).

13

Compare _Atkins v. United States,_ 556 F.2d 1028 (Ct.Claims 1977), cert.
denied, 434 U.S. 1009, 98 S.Ct. 718, 54 L.Ed.2d 751 (1978), (upholding
legislative veto provision in Federal Salary Act, 2 U.S.C. §§ 351 et seq.
(1976)) with _Consumer Energy Council of America v. FERC,_ 673 F.2d 425 (CA DC
1982), appeals and petitions for cert. pending, Nos. 81-2008, 81-2020,
81-2151, 81-2171, 82-177 and 82-209, (holding unconstitutional the legislative
veto provision in the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, 15 U.S.C. §§ 3301-3342
Supp. III 1979)).

14

See, _e.g.,_ 6 Op.Att'y Gen. 680, 683 (1854); Department of Justice,
Memorandum re Constitutionality of Provisions in Proposed Reorganization Bills
Now Pending in Congress, reprinted in S.Rep. No. 232, 81st Cong., 1st Sess.
19-20 (1949); Jackson, "A Presidential Legal Opinion," 66 Harv.L.Rev. 1353
(1953); 43 Op.Att'y Gen. No. 10, at 2 (1977).

15

I limit my concern here to those legislative vetoes which require either one
or both Houses of Congress to pass resolutions of approval or disapproval, and
leave aside the questions arising from the exercise of such powers by
committees of Congress.

16

I agree with Justice REHNQUIST that Congress did not intend the one-House veto
provision of § 244(c)(2) to be severable. Although the general rule is that
the presence of a savings clause creates a presumption of divisibility,
_Champlin Rfg. Co. v. Commission,_ 286 U.S. 210, 235, 52 S.Ct. 559, 565, 76
L.Ed. 1062 (1931), I read the savings clause contained in § 40 of the
Immigration Act as primarily pertaining to the severability of major parts of
the Act from one another, not the divisibility of different provisions within
a single section. Surely, Congress would want the naturalization provisions of
the Act to be severable from the deportation sections. But this does not
support preserving § 244 without the legislative veto any more than a savings
provision would justify preserving immigration authority without quota limits.

More relevant is the fact that for forty years Congress has insisted on
retaining a voice on individual suspension cases--it has frequently rejected
bills which would place final authority in the Executive branch. It is clear
that Congress believed its retention crucial. Given this history, the Court's
rewriting of the Act flouts the will of Congress.

17

The Pennsylvania Constitution required that all "bills of [a] public nature"
had to be printed after being introduced and had to lie over until the
following session of the legislature before adoption. Pa. Const. § 15 (1776).
These printing and layover requirements applied only to "bills." At the time,
measures could also be enacted as a "resolve," which was allowed by the
Constitution as "urgent temporary legislation" without such requirements. Pa.
Const. § 20 (1776). Using this method the Pennsylvania legislature routinely
evaded printing and layover requirements through adoption of resolves. A.
Nevins, The American States During and After the Revolution 152 (1969).

A 1784 Report of a committee of the Council of Censors, a state body
responsible for periodically reviewing the state government's adherence to its
Constitution, charged that the procedures for enacting legislation had been
evaded though the adoption of resolves instead of bills. Report of the
Committee of the Council of Censors 13 (1784). See Nevins, _supra,_ at 190.
When three years later the federal Constitutional Convention assembled in
Philadelphia, the delegates were reminded, in the course of discussing the
President's veto, of the dangers pointed out by the Council of Censors Report.
5 J. Elliot, Debates on the Adoption of the Federal Constitution 430 (1974
ed.). Furthermore, Madison, who made the motion that led to the Presentation
Clause, knew of the Council of Censors report, The Federalist No. 50, at 353
(Wright ed. 1974), and was aware of the Pennsylvania experience. See The
Federalist No. 48, at 346. We have previously recognized the relevance of the
Council of Censors report in interpreting the Constitution. See _Powell v.
McCormack,_ 395 U.S. 486, 529-530, 89 S.Ct. 1944, 1968-1969, 23 L.Ed.2d 491
(1969).

18

Although the legislative veto was not a feature of Congressional enactments
until the twentieth century, the practices of the first Congresses demonstrate
that the constraints of Article I were not envisioned as a constitutional
straightjacket. The First Congress, for example, began the practice of arming
its committees with broad investigatory powers without the passage of
legislation. See A. J sephy, On the Hill: A History of the American

Congress 81-83 (1975). More directly pertinent is the First Congress'
treatment of the Northwest Territories Ordinance of 1787. The ordinance,
initially drafted under the Articles of Confederation on July 13, 1787, was
the document which governed the territory of the United States northwest of
the Ohio River. The ordinance authorized the territories to adopt laws,
subject to disapproval in Congress.

"The governor and judges, or a majority of them, shall adopt and publish in
the district, such laws of the original states, criminal and civil, as may be
necessary and best suited to the circumstances of the district, _and report
them to Congress,_ from time to time; which laws shall be in force in the
district until the organization of the general assembly therein, _unless
disapproved of by Congress;_ but afterwards the legislature shall have
authority to alter them as they shall think fit." (emphasis added)

After the Constitution was enacted, the ordinance was reenacted to conform to
the requirements of the Constitution. Act of Aug. 7, 1789, ch. VIII, § 1, 1
Stat. 50-51. Certain provisions, such as one relating to appointment of
officials by Congress, were changed because of constitutional concerns, but
the language allowing disapproval by Congress was retained. Subsequent
provisions for territorial laws contained similar language. See, _e.g.,_ 48
U.S.C. § 1478 (1970).

Although at times Congress disapproved of territorial actions by passing
legislation, see _e.g.,_ Act of March 3, 1807, 4 Laws of the United States,
Ch. 99, 117, on at least two occasions one House of Congress passed
resolutions to disapprove territorial laws, only to have the other House fail
to pass the measure for reasons pertaining to the subject matter of the bills.
First, on February 16, 1795, the House of Representatives passed a concurrent
resolution disapproving in one sweep all but one of the laws that the
governors and judges of the Northwest Territory had passed at a legislative
session on August 1, 1792. 4 Annals of Congress 1227. The Senate, however,
refused to concur. 4 Annals of Congress 830. See B. Bond, The Civilization of
the Old Northwest 70-71 (1934). Second, on May 9, 1800, the House passed a
resolution to disapprove of a Mississippi territorial law imposing a license
fee on taverns. 3 House Journal 704-706. The Senate unsuccessfully attempted
to amend the resolution to strike down all laws of the Mississippi territory
enacted since June 30, 1799. Carter, Territorial Papers of the United States
Vol. 5 Mississippi, 94-95 (1937). The histories of the territories, the
correspondence of the era, and the Congressional reports contain no indication
that such resolutions disapproving of territorial laws were to be presented to
the President or that the authorization for such a "congressional veto" in the
Act of August 7, 1789 was of doubtful constitutionality.

The practices of the First Congress are not so clear as to be dispositive of
the constitutional question now before us. But it is surely significant that
this body, largely composed of the same men who authored Article I and secured
ratification of the Constitution, did not view the Constitution as forbidding
a precursor of the modern day legislative veto. See _Hampton v. United
States,_ 276 U.S. 394, 412, 48 S.Ct. 348, 353, 72 L.Ed. 624 (1928) ("In the
first Congress sat many members of the Constitutional Convention of 1787. This
Court has repeatedly laid down the principle that a contemporaneous
legislative exposition of the Constitution when the founders of our government
and framers of our Constitution were actively participating in public affairs,
long acquiesced in, fixed the construction to be given its provisions.")

19

"Legislative, or substantive, regulations are 'issued by an agency pursuant to
statutory authority and . . . implement the statute, as for example, the proxy
rules issue by the Securities and Exchange Commission . . . Such rules have
the force and effect of law.' U.S.Dept. of Justice, Attorney General's Manual
on the Administrative Procedures Act 30 n. 3 (1947)." _Batterton v. Francis,_
432 U.S. 416, 425 n. 9, 97 S.Ct. 2399, 2405 n. 9, 53 L.Ed.2d 448 (1977).

Substantive agency regulations are clearly exercises of lawmaking authority;
agency interpretations of their statutes are only arguably so. But as Henry
Monaghan has observed, "Judicial deference to agency 'interpretation' of law
is simply one way of recognizing a delegation of lawmaking authority to an
agency." H. Monaghan, _Marbury_ and the Administrative State, 83 Colum.L.Rev.
1, 26 (1983). See, _e.g., NLRB v. Hearst Publications,_ 322 U.S. 111, 64 S.Ct.
851, 88 L.Ed. 1170 (1944); _NLRB v. Hendricks County Rural Electric Membership
Corp.,_ 454 U.S. 170, 102 S.Ct. 216, 70 L.Ed.2d 323 (1981).

20

As the Court acknowledges, the "provisions of Art. I are integral parts of the
constitutional design for the separation of powers." _Ante,_ at 946. But these
separation of power concerns are that legislative power be exercised by
Congress, executive power by the President, and judicial power by the Courts.
A scheme which allows delegation of legislative power to the President and the
departments under his control, but forbids a check on its exercise by Congress
itself obviously denigrates the separation of power concerns underlying
Article I. To be sure, the doctrine of separation of powers is also concerned
with checking each branch's exercise of its characteristic authority. Section
244(c)(2) is fully consistent with the need for checks upon Congressional
authority, _infra,_ at 994-996, and the legislative veto mechanism, more
generally is an important check upon Executive authority, _supra,_ at 967-974.

21

The Court's other reasons for holding the legislative veto subject to the
presentment and bicameral passage requirements require but brief discussion.
First, the Court posits that the resolution of disapproval should be
considered equivalent to new legislation because absent the veto authority of
§ 244(c)(2) neither House could, short of legislation, effectively require the
Attorney General to deport an alien once the Attorney General has determined
that the alien should remain in the United States. _Ante,_ at 952-954. The
statement is neither accurate nor meaningful. The Attorney General's power
under the Act is only to "suspend" the order of deportation; the "suspension"
does not cancel the deportation or adjust the alien's status to that of a
permanent resident alien. Cancellation of deportation and adjustment of status
must await favorable action by Congress. More important, the question is
whether § 244(c)(2) as written is constitutional and no law is amended or
repealed by the resolution of disapproval which is, of course, expressly
authorized by that section.

The Court also argues that "the legislative character of the challenged action
of one House is confirmed by the fact that when the Framers intended to
authorize either House of Congress to act alone and outside of its prescribed
bicameral legislative role, they narrowly and precisely defined the procedure
for such action." _Ante,_ at 955.

Leaving aside again the above-refuted premise that all action with a
legislative character requires passage in a law, the short answer is that all
of these carefully defined exceptions to the presentment and bicameralism
strictures do not involve action of the Congress pursuant to a duly-enacted
statute. Indeed, for the most part these powers--those of impeachment, review
of appointments, and treaty ratification--are not legislative powers at all.
The fact that it was essential for the Constitution to stipulate that Congress
has the power to impeach and try the President hardly demonstrates a limit
upon Congress' authority to reserve itself a legislative veto, through
statutes, over subjects within its lawmaking authority.

22

In his opinion on the constitutionality of the legislative review provisions
of the most recent reorganization statute, 5 U.S.C. 906(a) (Supp. III 1979),
Attorney General Bell stated that "the statement in Article I, § 7 of the
procedural steps to be followed in the enactment of legislation does not
exclude other forms of action by the Congress. . . . The procedures prescribed
in Article I § 37, for congressional action are not exclusive." 43
Op.Atty.Gen. No. 10, at 2 (1977). "If the procedures provided in a given
statute have no effect on the constitutional distribution of power between the
legislature and the executive," then the statute is constitutional. _Id.,_ at
3. In the case of the reorganization statute, the power of the President to
refuse to submit a plan, combined with the power of either House of Congress
to reject a submitted plan suffices under the standard to make the statute
constitutional. Although the Attorney General sought to limit his opinion to
the reorganization statute, and the Executive opposes the instant statute, I
see no Article I basis to distinguish between the two.

23

Of course, when the authorizing legislation requires approval to be expressed
by a positive vote, then the two-House veto would clearly comply with the
bicameralism requirement under any analysis.

24

The Court's doubts that Congress entertained this "arcane" theory when it
enacted § 244(c)(2) disregards the fact that this is the historical basis upon
which the legislative vetoes contained in the Reorganization Acts have been
defended, _supra_ at ----, n. 20, and that the Reorganization Acts then
provided the precedent articulated in support of other legislative veto
provisions. See, _e.g._ 87 Cong.Rec. 735 (Rep. Dirksen) (citing Reorganization
Act in support of proposal to include a legislative veto in Lend-Lease Act),
H.R.Rep. No. 658, 93d Cong., 1st Sess. 42 (1973) (citing Reorganization Act as
"sufficient precedent" for legislative veto provision for Impoundment Control
Act.).

25

Madison emphasized that the principle of separation of powers is primarily
violated "where the whole power of one department is exercised by the same
hands which possess the whole power of another department." Federalist No. 47,
302-303. Madison noted that, the oracle of the separation doctrine,
Montesquieu, in writing that the legislative, executive and judicial powers
should not be united "in the same person or body of persons," did not mean
"that these departments ought to have no _partial agency_ in, or _control_
over the acts of each other." The Federalist No. 47, p. 325 (J. Cooke ed.
1961) (emphasis in original). Indeed, according to Montesquieu, the
legislature is uniquely fit to exercise an additional function: "to examine in
what manner the laws that it has made have been executed." W. Gwyn, The
Meaning of Separation of Powers 102 (1965).

