197 U.S. 11

25 S.Ct. 358

49 L.Ed. 643

HENNING JACOBSON, _Plff. in Err._ ,  
v.  
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS.

No. 70.

Argued December 6, 1904.

Decided February 20, 1905.

This case involves the validity, under the Constitution of the United States,
of certain provisions in the statutes of Massachusetts relating to
vaccination.

The Revised Laws of that commonwealth, chap. 75, § 137, provide that 'the
board of health of a city or town, if, in its opinion, it is necessary for the
public health or safety, shall require and enforce the vaccination and
revaccination of all the inhabitants thereof, and shall provide them with the
means of free vaccination. Whoever, being over twenty-one years of age and not
under guardianship, refuses or neglects to comply with such requirement shall
forfeit $5.'

An exception is made in favor of 'children who present a certificate, signed
by a registered physician, that they are unfit subjects for vaccination.' §
139.

Proceeding under the above statutes, the board of health of the city of
Cambridge, Massachusetts, on the 27th day of February, 1902, adopted the
following regulation: 'Whereas, smallpox has been prevalent to some extent in
the city of Cambridge, and still continues to increase; and whereas, it is
necessary for the speedy extermination of the disease that all persons not
protected by vaccination should be vaccinated; and whereas, in the opinion of
the board, the public health and safety require the vaccination or
revaccination of all the inhabitants of Cambridge; be it ordered, that all the
inhabitants habitants of the city who have not been successfully vaccinated
since March 1st, 1897, be vaccinated or revaccinated.'

Subsequently, the board adopted an additional regulation empowering a named
physician to enforce the vaccination of persons as directed by the board at
its special meeting of February 27th.

The above regulations being in force, the plaintiff in error, Jacobson, was
proceeded against by a criminal complaint in one of the inferior courts of
Massachusetts. The complaint charged that on the 17th day of July, 1902, the
board of health of Cambridge, being of the opinion that it was necessary for
the public health and safety, required the vaccination and revaccination of
all the inhabitants thereof who had not been successfully vaccinated since the
1st day of March, 1897, and provided them with the means of free vaccination;
and that the defendant, being over twenty-one years of age and not under
guardianship, refused and neglected to comply with such requirement.

The defendant, having been arraigned, pleaded not guilty. The government put
in evidence the above regulations adopted by the board of health, and made
proof tending to show that its chairman informed the defendant that, by
refusing to be vaccinated, he would incur the penalty provided by the statute,
and would be prosecuted therefor; that he offered to vaccinate the defendant
without expense to him; and that the offer was declined, and defendant refused
to be vaccinated.

The prosecution having introduced no other evidence, the defendant made
numerous offers of proof. But the trial court ruled that each and all of the
facts offered to be proved by the defendant were immaterial, and excluded all
proof of them.

The defendant, standing upon his offers of proof, and introducing no evidence,
asked numerous instructions to the jury, among which were the following:

That § 137 of chapter 75 of the Revised Laws of Massachusetts was in
derogation of the rights secured to the defendant by the preamble to the
Constitution of the United States, and tended to subvert and defeat the
purposes of the Constitution as declared in its preamble;

That the section referred to was in derogation of the rights secured to the
defendant by the 14th Amendment of the Constitution of the United States, and
especially of the clauses of that amendment providing that no state shall make
or enforce any law abridging the privileges or immunities of citizens of the
United States, nor deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without
due process of law, nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal
protection of the laws; and

That said section was opposed to the spirit of the Constitution.

Each of defendant's prayers for instructions was rejected, and he duly
excepted. The defendant requested the court, but the court refused, to
instruct the jury to return a verdict of not guilty. And the court instructed
structed the jury, in substance, that, if they believed the evidence
introduced by the commonwealth, and were satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendant was guilty of the offense charged in the complaint, they
would be warranted in finding a verdict of guilty. A verdict of guilty was
thereupon returned.

The case was then continued for the opinion of the supreme judicial court of
Massachusetts. Santa F e Pacific Railroad Company, the exceptions, sustained
the action of the trial court, and thereafter, pursuant to the verdict of the
jury, he was sentenced by the court to pay a fine of $5. And the court ordered
that he stand committed until the fine was paid.

Messrs. _George Fred Williams_ and _James A. Halloran_ for plaintiff in error.

[Argument of Counsel from pages 14-18 intentionally omitted] Messrs.
_Frederick H. Nash_ and _Herbert Parker_ for defendant in error.

[Argument of Counsel from pages 18-22 intentionally omitted]

Mr. Justice Harlan delivered the opinion of the court:

1

We pass without extended discussion the suggestion that the particular section
of the statute of Massachusetts now in question (§ 137, chap. 75) is in
derogation of rights secured by the preamble of the Constitution of the United
States. Although that preamble indicates the general purposes for which the
people ordained and established the Constitution, it has never been regarded
as the source of any substantive power conferred on the government of the
United States, or on any of its departments. Such powers embrace only those
expressly granted in the body of the Constitution, and such as may be implied
from those so granted. Although, therefore, one of the declared objects of the
Constitution was to secure the blessings of liberty to all under the sovereign
jurisdiction and authority of the United States, no power can be exerted to
that end by the United States, unless, apart from the preamble, it be found in
some express delegation of power, or in some power to be properly implied
therefrom. 1 Story, Const. § 462.

2

We also pass without discussion the suggestion that the above section of the
statute is opposed to the spirit of the Constitution. Undoubtedly, as observed
by Chief Justice Marshall, speaking for the court in _Sturges_ v.
_Crowninshield_ , 4 Wheat. 122, 202, 4 L. ed. 529, 550, 'the spirit of an
instrument, especially of a constitution, is to be respected not less than its
letter; yet the spirit is to be collected chiefly from its words.' We have no
need in this case to go beyond the plain, obvious meaning of the words in
those provisions of the Constitution which, it is contended, must control our
decision.

3

What, according to the judgment of the state court, are the scope and effect
of the statute? What results were intended to be accomplished by it? These
questions must be answered.

4

The supreme judicial court of Massachusetts said in the present case: 'Let us
consider the offer of evidence which was made by the defendant Jacobson. The
ninth of the propositions which he offered to prove, as to what vaccination
consists of, is nothing more than a fact of common knowledge, upon which the
statute is founded, and proof of it was unnecessary and immaterial. The
thirteenth and fourteenth involved matters depending upon his personal
opinion, which could not be taken as correct, or given effect, merely because
he made it a ground of refusal to comply with the requirement. Moreover, his
views could not affect the validity of the statute, nor entitle him to be
excepted from its provisions. _Com._ v. _Connolly_ , 163 Mass. 539, 40 N. E.
862; _Com._ v. _Has_ , 122 Mass. 40; _Reynolds_ v. _United States_ , 98 U. S.
145, 25 L. ed. 244; _Reg._ v. _Downes_ , 13 Cox, C. C. 111. The other eleven
propositions all relate to alleged injurious or dangerous effects of
vaccination. The defendant 'offered to prove and show be competent evidence'
these socalled facts. Each of them, in its nature, is such that it cannot be
stated as a truth, otherwise than as a matter of opinion. The only 'competent
evidence' that could be presented to the court to prove these propositions was
the testimony of experts, giving their opinions. It would not have been
competent to introduce the medical history of individual cases. Assuming that
medical experts could have been found who would have testified in support of
these propositions, and that it had become the duty of the judge, in
accordance with the law as stated in _Com._ v. _Anthes_ , 5 Gray, 185, to
instruct the jury as to whether or not the statute is constitutional, he would
have been obliged to consider the evidence in connection with facts of common
knowledge, which the court will always regard in passing upon the
constitutionality of a statute. He would have considered this testimony of
experts in connection with the facts that for nearly a century most of the
members of the medical profession have regarded vaccination, repeated after
intervals, as a preventive of smallpox; that, while they have recognized the
possibility of injury to an individual from carelessness in the performance of
it, or even in a conceivable case without carelessness, they generally have
considered the risk of such an injury too small to be seriously weighed as
against the benefits coming from the discreet and proper use of the
preventive; and that not only the medical profession and the people generally
have for a long time entertained these opinions, but legislatures and courts
have acted upon them with general unanimity. If the defendant had been
permitted to introduce such expert testimony as he had in support of these
several propositions, it could not have changed the result. It would not have
justified the court in holding that the legislature had transcended its power
in enacting this statute on their judgment of what the welfare of the people
demands.' _Com._ v. _Jacobson_ , 183 Mass. 242, 66 N. E. 719.

5

While the mere rejection of defendant's offers of proof does not strictly
present a Federal question, we may properly regard the exclusion of evidence
upon the ground of its incompetency or immateriality under the statute as
showing what, in the opinion of the state court, are the scope and meaning of
the statute. Taking the above observations of the state court as indicating
the scope of the statute,--and such is our duty. _Leffingwell_ v. _Warren_ , 2
Black, 599, 603, 17 L. ed. 261. 262; _Morley_ v. _Lake Shore & M. S. R. Co._
146 U. S. 162, 167, 36 L. ed. 925, 928, 13 Sup. Ct. Rep. 54; _Tullis_ v. _Lake
Erie & W. R. Co._ 175 U. S. 348, 44 L. ed. 192, 20 Sup. Ct. Rep. 136; _W. W.
Cargill Co._ v. _Minnesota_ , 180 U. S. 452, 466, 45 L. ed. 619, 625, 21 Sup.
Ct. Rep. 423,--we assume, for the purposes of the present inquiry, that its
provisions require, at least as a general rule, that adults not under the
guardianship and remaining within the limits of the city of Cambridge must
submit to the regulation adopted by the board of health. Is the statute, so
construed, therefore, inconsistent with the liberty which the Constitution of
the United States secures to every person against deprivation by the state?

6

The authority of the state to enact this statute is to be referred to what is
commonly called the police power,--a power which the state did not surrender
when becoming a member of the Union under the Constitution. Although this
court has refrained frained from any attempt to define the limits of that
power, yet it has distinctly recognized the authority of a state to enact
quarantine laws and 'health laws of every description;' indeed, all laws that
relate to matters completely within its territory and which do not by their
necessary operation affect the people of other states. According to settled
principles, the police power of a state must be held to embrace, at least,
such reasonable regulations established directly by legislative enactment as
will protect the public health and the public safety. _Gibbons_ v. _Ogden_ , 9
Wheat. 1, 203, 6 L. ed. 23, 71; _Hannibal & St. J. R. Co._ v. _Husen_ , 95 U.
S. 465, 470, 24 L. ed. 527, 530; _Boston Beer Co._ v. _Massachusetts_ , 97 U.
S. 25, 24 L. ed. 989; _New Orleans Gaslight Co._ v. _Louisiana Light & H. P. &
Mfg. Co._ 115 U. S. 650, 661, 29 L. ed. 516, 520, 6 Sup. Ct. Rep. 252;
_Lawson_ v. _Stecle_ , 152 U. S. 133, 38 L. ed. 385, 14 Sup. Ct. Rep. 499. It
is equally true that the state may invest local bodies called into existence
for purposes of local administration with authority in some appropriate way to
safeguard the public health and the public safety. The mode or manner in which
those results are to be accomplished is within the discretion of the state,
subject, of course, so far as Federal power is concerned, only to the
condition that no rule prescribed by a state, nor any regulation adopted by a
local governmental agency acting under the sanction of state legislation,
shall contravene the Constitution of the United States, nor infringe any right
granted or secured by that instrument. A local enactment or regulation, even
if based on the acknowledged police powers of a state, must always yield in
case of conflict with the exercise by the general government of any power it
possesses under the Constitution, or with any right which that instrument
gives or secures. _Gibbons_ v. _Ogden_ , 9 Wheat. 1, 210, 6 L. ed. 23, 73;
_Sinnot_ v. _Davenport_ , 22 How. 227, 243, 16 L. ed. 243, 247; _Missouri, K.
& T. R. Co._ v. _Haber_ , 169 U. S. 613, 626, 42 L. ed. 878, 882, 18 Sup. Ct.
Rep. 488.

7

We come, then, to inquire whether any right given or secured by the
Constitution is invaded by the statute as interpreted by the state court. The
defendant insists that his liberty is invaded when the state subjects him to
fine or imprisonment for neglecting or refusing to submit to vaccination; that
a compulsory vaccination law is unreasonable, arbitrary, and oppressive, and,
therefore, hostile to the inherent right of every freeman to care for his own
body and health in such way as to him seems best; and that the execution of
such a law against one who objects to vaccination, no matter for what reason,
is nothing short of an assault upon his person. But the liberty secured by the
Constitution of the United States to every person within its jurisdiction does
not import an absolute right in each person to be, at all times and in all
circumstances, wholly freed from restraint. There are manifold restraints to
which every person is necessarily subject for the common good. On any other
basis organized society could not exist with safety to its members. Society
based on the rule that each one is a law unto himself would soon be confronted
with disorder and anarchy. Real liberty for all could not exist under the
operation of a principle which recognizes the right of each individual person
to use his own, whether in respect of his person or his property, regardless
of the injury that may be done to others. This court has more than once
recognized it as a fundamental principle that 'persons and property are
subjected to all kinds of restraints and burdens in order to secure the
general comfort, health, and prosperity of the state; of the perfect right of
the legislature to do which no question ever was, or upon acknowledged general
principles ever can be, made, so far as natural persons are concerned.'
_Hannibal & St. J. R. Co._ v. _Husen_ , 95 U. S. 465, 471, 24 L. ed. 527, 530;
_Missouri, K. & T. R. Co._ v. _Haber_ , 169 U. S. 613, 628, 629, 42 L. ed.
878-883, 18 Sup. Ct. Rep. 488; _Thorpe_ v. _Rutland & B. R. Co._ 27 Vt. 148,
62 Am. Dec. 625. In _Crowley_ v. _Christensen_ , 137 U. S. 86, 89, 34 L. ed.
620, 621, 11 Sup. Ct. Rep. 13, we said: 'The possession and enjoyment of all
rights are subject to such reasonable conditions as may be deemed by the
governing authority of the country essential to the safety, health, peace,
good order, and morals of the community. Even liberty itself, the greatest of
all rights, is not unrestricted license to act according to one's own will. It
is only freedom from restraint under conditions essential to the equal
enjoyment of the same right by others. It is, then, liberty regulated by law.'
In the Constitution of Massachusetts adopted in 1780 it was laid down as a
fundamental principle of the social compact that the whole people covenants
with each citizen, and each citizen with the whole people, that all shall be
governed by certain laws for 'the common good,' and that government is
instituted 'for the common good, for the protection, safety, prosperity, and
happiness of the people, and not for the profit, honor, or private interests
of any one man, family, or class of men.' The good and welfare of the
commonwealth, of which the legislature is primarily the judge, is the basis on
which the police power rests in Massachusetts. _Com._ v. _Alger_ , 7 Cush. 84.

8

Applying these principles to the present case, it is to be observed that the
legislature of Massachusetts required the inhabitants of a city or town to be
vaccinated only when, in the opinion of the board of health, that was
necessary for the public health or the public safety. The authority to
determine for all what ought to be done in such an emergency must have been
lodged somewhere or in some body; and surely it was appropriate for the
legislature to refer that question, in the first instance, to a board of
health composed of persons residing in the locality affected, and appointed,
presumably, because of their fitness to determine such questions. To invest
such a body with authority over such matters was not an unusual, nor an
unreasonable or arbitrary, requirement. Upon the principle of self-defense, of
paramount necessity, a community has the right to protect itself against an
epidemic of disease which threatens the safety of its members. It is to be
observed that when the regulation in question was adopted smallpox, according
to the recitals in the regulation adopted by the board of health, was
prevalent to some extent in the city of Cambridge, and the disease was
increasing. If such was the situation,--and nothing is asserted or appears in
the record to the contrary,--if we are to attach, any value whatever to the
knowledge which, it is safe to affirm, in common to all civilized peoples
touching smallpox and the methods most usually employed to eradicate that
disease, it cannot be adjudged that the present regulation of the board of
health was not necessary in order to protect the public health and secure the
public safety. Smallpox being prevalent and increasing at Cambridge, the court
would usurp the functions of another branch of government if it adjudged, as
matter of law, that the mode adopted under the sanction of the state, to
protect the people at large was arbitrary, and not justified by the
necessities of the case. We say necessities of the case, because it might be
that an acknowledged power of a local community to protect itself against an
epidemic threatening the safety of all might be exercised in particular
circumstances and in reference to particular persons in such an arbitrary,
unreasonable manner, or might go so far beyond what was reasonably required
for the safety of the public, as to authorize or compel the courts to
interfere for the protection of such persons. _Wisconsin, M. & P. R. Co._ v.
_Jacobson_ , 179 U. S. 287, 301, 45 L. ed. 194, 201, 21 Sup. Ct. Rep. 115; 1
Dill. Mun. Corp. 4th ed. §§ 319-325, and authorities in notes; Freurid, Police
Power, §§ 63 _et seq._ In _Hannibal & St. J. R. Co._ v. _Husen_ , 95 U. S.
465, 471-473, 24 L. ed. 527, 530, 531, this court recognized the right of a
state to pass sanitary laws, laws for the protection of life, liberty, health,
or property within its limits, laws to prevent persons and animals suffering
under contagious or infectious diseases, or convicts, from coming within its
borders. But, as the laws there involved went beyond the necessity of the
case, and, under the guise of exerting a police power, invaded the domain of
Federal authority, and violated rights secured by the Constitution, this court
deemed it to be its duty to hold such laws invalid. If the mode adopted by the
commonwealth of Massachusetts for the protection of its local communities
against smallpox proved to be distressing, inconvenient, or objectionable to
some,--if nothing more could be reasonably affirmed of the statute in
question,--the answer is that it was the duty of the constituted authorities
primarily to keep in view the welfare, comfort, and safety of the many, and
not permit the interests of the many to be subordinated to the wishes or
convenience of the few. There is, of course, a sphere within which the
individual may assert the supremacy of his own will, and rightfully dispute
the authority of any human government, especially of any free government
existing under a written constitution, to interfere with the exercise of that
will. But it is equally true that in every well-ordered society charged with
the duty of conserving the safety of its members the rights of the individual
in respect of his liberty may at times, under the pressure of great dangers,
be subjected to such restraint, to be enforced by reasonable regulations, as
the safety of the general public may demand. An American citizen arriving at
an American port on a vessel in which, during the voyage, there had been cases
of yellow fever or Asiatic cholera, he, although apparently free from disease
himself, may yet, in some circumstances, be held in quarantine against his
will on board of such vessel or in a quarantine station, until it be
ascertained by inspection, conducted with due diligence, that the danger of
the spread of the disease among the community at large has disappeared. The
liberty secured by the 14th Amendment, this court has said, consists, in part,
in the right of a person 'to live and work where he will' ( _Allgeyer_ v.
_Louisiana_ , 165 U. S. 578, 41 L. ed. 832, 17 Sup. Ct. Rep. 427); and yet he
may be compelled, by force if need be, against his will and without regard to
his personal wishes or his pecuniary interests, or even his religious or
political convictions, to take his place in the ranks of the army of his
country, and risk the chance of being shot down in its defense. It is not,
therefore, true that the power of the public to guard itself against imminent
danger depends in every case involving the control of one's body upon his
willingness to submit to reasonable regulations established by the constituted
authorities, under the sanction of the state, for the purpose of protecting
the public collectively against such danger.

9

It is said, however, that the statute, as interpreted by the state court,
although making an exception in favor of children certified by a registered
physician to be unfit subjects for vaccination, makes no exception in case of
adults in like condition. But this cannot be deemed a denial of the equal
protection of the laws to adults; for the statute is applicable equally to all
in like condition, and there are obviously reasons why regulations may be
appropriate for adults which could not be safely applied to persons of tender
years.

10

Looking at the propositions embodied in the defendant's rejected offers of
proof, it is clear that they are more formidable by their number than by their
inherent value. Those offers in the main seem to have had no purpose except to
state the general theory of those of the medical profession who attach little
or no value to vaccination as a means of preventing the spread of smallpox, or
who think that vaccination causes other diseases of the body. What everybody
knows the court must know, and therefore the state court judicially knew, as
this court knows, that an opposite theory accords with the common belief, and
is maintained by high medical authority. We must assume that, when the statute
in question was passed, the legislature of Massachusetts was not unaware of
these opposing theories, and was compelled, of necessity, to choose between
them. It was not compelled to commit a matter involving the public health and
safety to the final decision of a court or jury. It is no part of the function
of a court or a jury to determine which one of two modes was likely to be the
most effective for the protection of the public against disease. That was for
the legislative department to determine in the light of all the information it
had or could obtain. It could not properly abdicate its function to guard the
public health and safety. The state legislature proceeded upon the theory
which recognized vaccination as at least an effective, if not the best-known,
way in which to meet and suppress the evils of a smallpox epidemic that
imperiled an entire population. Upon what sound principles as to the relations
existing between the different departments of government can the court review
this action of the legislature? If there is any such power in the judiciary to
review legislative action in respect of a matter affecting the general
welfare, it can only be when that which the legislature has done comes within
the rule that, if a statute purporting to have been enacted to protect the
public health, the public morals, or the public safety, has no real or
substantial relation to those objects, or is, beyond all question, a plain,
palpable invasion of rights secured by the fundamental law, it is the duty of
the courts to so adjudge, and thereby give effect to the Constitution.
_Mugler_ v. _Kansas_ , 123 U. S. 623, 661, 31 L. ed. 205, 210, 8 Sup. Ct. Rep.
273; _Minnesota_ v. _Barber_ , 136 U. S. 313, 320, 34 L. ed. 455, 458, 3
Inters. Com. Rep. 185, 10 Sup. Ct. Rep. 862; _Atkin_ v. _Kansas_ , 191 U. S.
207, 223, 48 L. ed. 148, 158, 24 Sup. Ct. Rep. 124.

11

Whatever may be thought of the expediency of this statute, it cannot be
affirmed to be, beyond question, in palpable conflict with the Constitution.
Nor, in view of the methods employed to stamp out the disease of smallpox, can
anyone confidently assert that the means prescribed by the state to that end
has no real or substantial relation to the protection of the public health and
the public safety. Such an assertion would not be consistent with the
experience of this and other countries whose authorities have dealt with the
disease of smallpox. And the principle of vaccination as a means to prevent
the spread of smallpox has been enforced in many states by statutes making the
vaccination of children a condition of their right to enter or remain in
public schools. _Blue_ v. _Beach_ , 155 Ind. 121, 50 L. R. A. 64, 80 Am. St.
Rep. 195, 56 N. E. 89; _Morris_ v. _Columbus_ , 102 Ga. 792, 42 L. R. A. 175,
66 Am. St. Rep. 243, 30 S. E. 850; _State_ v. _Hay_ , 126 N. C. 999, 49 L. R.
A. 588, 78 Am. St. Rep. 691, 35 S. E. 459; _Abeel_ v. _Clark_ , 84 Cal. 226,
24 Pac. 383; _Bissell_ v. _Davison_ , 65 Conn. 183, 29 L. R. A. 251, 32 Atl.
348; _Hazen_ v. _Strong_ , 2 Vt. 427; _Duffield_ v. _Williamsport School
District_ , 162 Pa. 476, 25 L. R. A. 152, 29 Atl. 742.

12

The latest case upon the subject of which we are aware is _Viemester_ v.
_White_ , decided very recently by the court of appeals of New York. That case
involved the validity of a statute excluding from the public schools all
children who had not been vacinated. One contention was that the statute and
the regulation adopted in exercise of its provisions was inconsistent with the
rights, privileges, and liberties of the citizen. The contention was
overruled, the court saying, among other things: 'Smallpox is known of all to
be a dangerous and contagious disease. If vaccination strongly tends to
prevent the transmission or spread of this disease, it logically follows that
children may be refused admission to the public schools until they have been
vaccinated. The appellant claims that vaccination does not tend to prevent
smallpox, but tends to bring about other diseases, and that it does much harm,
with no good. It must be conceded that some laymen, both learned and
unlearned, and some physicians of great skill and repute, do not believe that
vaccination is a preventive of smallpox. The common belief, however, is that
it has a decided tendency to prevent the spread of this fearful disease, and
to render it less dangerous to those who contract it. While not accepted by
all, it is accepted by the mass of the people, as well as by most members of
the medical profession. It has been general in our state, and in most
civilized nations for generations. It is generally accepted in theory, and
generally applied in practice, both by the voluntary action of the people, and
in obedience to the command of law. Nearly every state in the Union has
statutes to encourage, or directly or indirectly to require, vaccination; and
this is true of most nations of Europe. . . . A common belief, like common
knowledge, does not require evidence to establish its existence, but may be
acted upon without proof by the legislature and the courts.. . . The fact that
the belief is not universal is not controlling, for there is scarcely any
belief that is accepted by everyone. The possibility that the belief may be
wrong, and that science may yet show it to be wrong, is not conclusive; for
the legislature has the right to pass laws which, according to the common
belief of the people, are adapted to prevent the spread of contagious
diseases. In a free country, where the government is by the people, through
their chosen representatives, practical legislation admits of no other
standard of action, for what the people believe is for the common welfare must
be accepted as tending to promote the common welfare, whether it does in fact
or not. Any other basis would conflict with the spirit of the Constitution,
and would sanction measures opposed to a Republican form of government. While
we do not decide, and cannot decide, that vaccination is a preventive of
smallpox, we take judicial notice of the fact that this is the common belief
of the people of the state, and, with this fact as a foundation, we hold that
the statute in question is a health law, enacted in a reasonable and proper
exercise of the police power.' 179 N. Y. 235, 72 N. E. 97.

13

Since, then, vaccination, as a means of protecting a community against
smallpox, finds strong support in the experience of this and other countries,
no court, much less a jury, is justified in disregarding the action of the
legislature simply because in its or their opinion that particular method was
perhaps, or possibly--not the best either for children or adults.

14

Did the offers of proof made by the defendant present a case which entitled
him, while remaining in Cambridge, to claim exemption from the operation of
the statute and of the regulation adopted by the board of health? We have
already said that his rejected offers, in the main, only set forth the theory
of those who had no faith in vaccination as a means of preventing the spread
of smallpox, or who thought that vaccination, without benefiting the public,
put in peril the health of the person vaccinated. But there were some offers
which it is contended embodied distinct facts that might properly have been
considered. Let us see how this is.

15

The defendant offered to prove that vaccination 'quite often' caused serious
and permanent injury to the health of the person vaccinated; that the
operation 'occasionally' resulted in death; that it was 'impossible' to tell
'in any particular case' what the results of vaccination would be, or whether
it would injure the health or result in death; that 'quite often' one's blood
is in a certain condition of impurity when it is not prudent or safe to
vaccinate him; that there is no practical test by which to determine 'with any
degree of certainty' whether one's blood is in such condition of impurity as
to render vaccination necessarily unsafe or dangerous; that vaccine matter is
'quite often' impure and dangerous to be used, but whether impure or not
cannot be ascertained by any known practical test; that the defendant refused
to submit to vaccination for the reason that he had, 'when a child,' been
caused great and extreme suffering for a long period by a disease produced by
vaccination; and that he had witnessed a similar result of vaccination, not
only in the case of his son, but in the cases of others.

16

These offers, in effect, invited the court and jury to go over the whole
ground gone over by the legislature when it enacted the statute in question.
The legislature assumed that some children, by reason of their condition at
the time, might not be fit subjects of vaccination; and it is suggested--and
we will not say without reason--that such is the case with some adults. But
the defendant did not offer to prove that, by reason of his then condition, he
was in fact not a fit subject of vaccination at the time he was informed of
the requirement of the regulation adopted by the board of health. It is
entirely consistent with his offer of proof that, after reaching full age, he
had become, so far as medical skill could discover, and when informed of the
regulation of the board of health was, a fit subject of vaccination, and that
the vaccine matter to be used in his case was such as any medical practitioner
of good standing would regard as proper to be used. The matured opinions of
medical men everywhere, and the experience of mankind, as all must know,
negative the suggestion that it is not possible in any case to determine
whether vaccination is safe. Was defendant exempted from the operation of the
statute simply because of his dread of the same evil results experienced by
him when a child, and which he had observed in the cases of his son and other
children? Could he reasonably claim such an exemption because 'quite often,'
or 'occasionally,' injury had resulted from vaccination, or because it was
impossible, in the opinion of some, by any practical test, to determine with
absolute certainty whether a particular person could be safely vaccinated?

17

It seems to the court that an affirmative answer to these questions would
practically strip the legislative department of its function to care for the
public health and the public safety when endangered by epidemics of disease.
Such an answer would mean that compulsory vaccination could not, in any
conceivable case, be legally enforced in a community, even at the command of
the legislature, however widespread the epidemic of smallpox, and however deep
and universal was the belief of the community and of its medical advisers that
a system of general vaccination was vital to the safety of all.

18

We are not prepared to hold that a minority, residing or remaining in any city
or town where smallpox is prevalent, and enjoying the general protection
afforded by an organized local government, may thus defy the will of its
constituted authorities, acting in good faith for all, under the legislative
sanction of the state. If such be the privilege of a minority, then a like
privilege would belong to each individual of the community, and the spectacle
would be presented of the welfare and safety of an entire population being
subordinated to the notions of a single individual who chooses to remain a
part of that population. We are unwilling to hold it to be an element in the
liberty secured by the Constitution of the United States that one person, or a
minority of persons, residing in any community and enjoying the benefits of
its local government, should have the power thus to dominate the majority when
supported in their action by the authority of the state. While this court
should guard with firmness every right appertaining to life, liberty, or
property as secured to the individual by the supreme law of the land, it is of
the last importance that it should not invade the domain of local authority
except when it is plainly necessary to do so in order to enforce that law. The
safety and the health of the people of Massachusetts are, in the first
instance, for that commonwealth to guard and protect. They are matters that do
not ordinarily concern the national government. So far as they can be reached
by any government, they depend, primarily, upon such action as the state, in
its wisdom, may take; and we do not perceive that this legislation has invaded
any right secured by the Federal Constitution.

19

Before closing this opinion we deem it appropriate, in order to prevent
misapprehension as to our views, to observe--perhaps to repeat a thought
already sufficiently expressed, namely--that the police power of a state,
whether exercised directly by the legislature, or by a local body acting under
its authority, may be exerted in such circumstances, or by regulations so
arbitrary and oppressive in particular cases, as to justify the interference
of the courts to prevent wrong and oppression. Extreme cases can be readily
suggested. Ordinarily such cases are not safe guides in the administration of
the law. It is easy, for instance, to suppose the case of an adult who is
embraced by the mere words of the act, but yet to subject whom to vaccination
in a particular condition of his health or body would be cruel and inhuman in
the last degree. We are not to be understood as holding that the statute was
intended to be applied to such a case, or, if it was so intended, that the
judiciary would not be competent to interfere and protect the health and life
of the individual concerned. 'All laws,' this court has said, 'should receive
a sensible construction. General terms should be so limited in their
application as not to lead to injustice, oppression, or an absurd consequence.
It will always, therefore, be presumed that the legislature intended
exceptions to its language which would avoid results of this character. The
reason of the law in such cases should prevail over its letter.' _United
States_ v. _Kirby_ , 7 Wall. 482, 19 L. ed. 278; _Lau Ow Bew_ v. _United
States_ , 144 U. S. 47, 58, 36 L. ed. 340, 344, 12 Sup. Ct. Rep. 517. Until
otherwise informed by the highest court of Massachusetts, we are not inclined
to hold that the statute establishes the absolute rule that an adult must be
vaccinated if it be apparent or can be shown with reasonable certainty that he
is not at the time a fit subject of vaccination, or that vaccination, by
reason of his then condition, would seriously impair his health, or probably
cause his death. No such case is here presented. It is the cause of an adult
who, for aught that appears, was himself in perfect health and a fit subject
of vaccination, and yet, while remaining in the community, refused to obey the
statute and the regulation adopted in execution of its provisions for the
protection of the public health and the public safety, confessedly endangered
by the presence of a dangerous disease.

20

We now decide only that the statute covers the present case, and that nothing
clearly appears that would justify this court in holding it to be
unconstitutional and inoperative in its application to the plaintiff in error.

21

_The judgment of the court below must be affirmed_.

22

It is so ordered.

23

Mr. Justice Brewer and Mr. Justice Peckham dissent.

'State-supported facilities for vaccination began in England in 1808 with the
National Vaccine Establishment. In 1840 vaccination fees were made payable out
of the rates. The first compulsory act was passed in 1853, the guardians of
the poor being intrusted with the carrying out of the law; in 1854 the public
vacinations under one year of age were 408,824 as against an average of
180,960 for several years before. In 1867 a new act was passed, rather to
remove some technical difficulties than to enlarge the scope of the former
act; and in 1871 the act was passed which compelled the boards of guardians to
appoint vaccination officers. The guardians also appoint a public vaccinator,
who must be duly qualified to practise medicine, and whose duty it is to
vaccinate (for a fee of one shilling and sixpence) any child resident within
his district brought to him for that purpose, to examine the same a week
after, to give a certificate, and to certify to the vaccination officer the
fact of vaccination or of insusceptibility. . . .

Vaccination was made compulsory in Bavarla in 1807, and subsequently in the
following countries: Denmark (1810), Sweden (1814), W urttemberg, Hesse, and
other German states (1818), Prussia (1835), Roumania (1874), Hungary (1876),
and Servia (1881). It is compulsory by cantonal law in 10 out of the 22 Swiss
cantons; an attempt to pass a Federal compulsory law was defeated by a
plebiscite in 1881. In the following countries there is no compulsory law, but
governmental facilities and compulsion on various classes more or less
directly under governmental control, such as soldiers, state employees,
apprentices, school pupils, etc.: France, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Belgium.
Norway, Austria, Turkey. . . . Vaccination has been compulsory in South
Australia since 1872, in Victoria since 1874, and in Western Australia since
1878. In Tasmania a compulsory act was passed in 1882. In New South Wales
there is no compulsion, but free facilities for vaccination. Compulsion was
adopted at Calcutta in 1880, and since then at 80 other towns of Bengal, at
Madras in 1884, and at Bombay and elsewhere in the presidency a few years
earlier. Revaccination was made compulsory in Denmark in 1871, and in Roumania
in 1874; in Holland it was enacted for all school pupils in 1872. The various
laws and administrative orders which had been for many years in force as to
vaccination and revaccination in the several German states were consolidated
in an imperial statute of 1874.' 24 Encyclopaedia Britannica (1894),
_Vaccination_.

'In 1857 the British Parliament received answers from 552 physicians to
questions which were asked them in reference to the utility of vaccination,
and only two of these spoke against it. Nothing proves this utility more
clearly than the statistics obtained. Especially instructive are those which
Flinzer compiled respecting the epidemic in Chemnitz which prevailed in
1870-71. At this time in the town there were 64,255 inhabitants, of whom
53,891, or 83.87 per cent, were vaccinated, 5,712, or 8.89 per cent were
unvaccinated, and 4,652, or 7.24 per cent, had had the smallpox before. Of
those vaccinated 953, or 1.77 per cent, became affected with smallpox, and of
the uninocculated 2,643, or 46.3 per cent, had the disease. In the vaccinated
the mortality from the disease was 0.73 per cent, and in the unprotected it
was 9.16 per cent. In general, the danger of infection is six times as great,
and the mortality 68 times as great, in the unvaccinated, as in the
vaccinated. Statistics derived from the civil population are in general not so
instructive as those derived from armies, where vaccination is usually more
carefully performed, and where statistics can be more accurately collected.
During the Franco-German war (1870-71) there was in France a widespread
epidemic of smallpox, but the German army lost

during the campaign only 450 cases, or 58 men to the 100,000; in the French
army, however, where vaccination was not carefully carried out, the number of
deaths from smallpox was 23,400.' , Johnson's Universal Cyclopaedia (1897),
_Vaccination_.

'The degree of protection afforded by vaccination thus became a question of
great interest. Its extreme value was easily demonstrated by statistical
researches. In England, in the last half of the eighteenth century, out of
every 1,000 deaths, 96 occurred from smallpox; in the first half of the
present century, out of every 1,000 deaths, but 35 were caused by that
disease. The amount of mortality in a country by smallpox seems to bear a
fixed relation to the extent to which vaccination is carried out In all
England and Wales, for some years previous to 1853, the proportional mortality
by smallpox was 21.9 to 1,000 deaths from all causes; in London it was but 16
to 1,000; in Ireland, where vaccination was much less general, it was 49 to
1,000, while in Connaught it was 60 to 1,000. On the other hand, in a number
of European countries where vaccination was more or less compulsory, the
proportionate number of deaths from smallpox about the same time varied from 2
per 1,000 of all causes in Bohemia, Lombardy, Venice, and Sweden, to 8.33 per
1,000 in Saxony. Although in many instances persons who had been vaccinated
were attacked with smallpox in a more or less modified form, it was noticed
that the persons so attacked had been commonly vaccinated many years
previously. 16 American Cyclopedia, _Vaccination_ (1883).

'Dr Buchanan, the medical officer of the London Government Board, reported
[1881] as the result of statistics that the smallpox death rate among adult
persons vaccinated was 90 to a million; whereas among those unvaccinated it
was 3,350 to a million; whereas among vaccinated children under five years of
age, 42 1/2 per million; whereas among unvaccinated children of the same age
it was 5,950 per million.' Hardway, Essentials of Vaccination (1882). The same
author reports that, among other conclusions reached by the Academie de
Medicine of France, was one that, 'without vaccination, hygienic measures
(isolation, disinfection, etc.) are of themselves insufficient for
preservation from smallpox.' _Ibid_.

The Belgian Academy of Medicine appointed a committee to make an exhaustive
examination of the whole subject, and among the conclusions reported by them
were: 1. 'Without vaccination, hygienic measures and means, whether public or
private, are powerless in preserving mankind from smallpox. . . . 3.
Vaccination is always an inoffensive operation when

practised with proper care on healthy subjects. . . . 4. It is highly
desirable, in the interests of the health and lives of our countrymen, that
vaccination should be rendered compulsory.' Edwards, _Vaccination_ (1882.)

The English Royal Commission, appointed with Lord Herschell, the Lord
Chancellor of England, at its head, to inquire, among other things, as to the
effect of vaccination in reducing the prevalence of, and mortality from,
smallpox, reported, after several years of investigation: 'We think that it
diminishes the liability to be attacked by the disease; that it modifies the
character of the disease and renders it less fatal,--of a milder and less
severe type; that the protection it affords against attacks of the disease is
greatest during the years immediately succeeding the operation of
vaccination.'

