20 L.Ed.2d 1189

88 S.Ct. 2186

392 U.S. 409

Joseph Lee JONES et ux., Petitioners,  
v.  
ALFRED H. MAYER CO. et al.

No. 645.

Argued April 1 and 2, 1968.

Decided June 17, 1968.

[Syllabus from pages 409-410 intentionally omitted]

Samuel H. Liberman, St. Louis, Mo., for petitioners.

Israel Treiman, St. Louis, Mo., for respondents.

Atty. Gen. Ramsey Clark for the United States, as amicus curiae, by special
leave of Court.

Mr. Justice STEWART delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

In this case we are called upon to determine the scope and constitutionality
of an Act of Congress, 42 U.S.C. § 1982, which provides that:

2

'All citizens of the United States shall have the same right, in every State
and Territory, as is enjoyed by white citizens thereof to inherit, purchase,
lease, sell, hold, and convey real and personal property.'

3

On September 2, 1965, the petitioners filed a complaint in the District Court
for the Eastern District of Missouri, alleging that the respondents had
refused to sell them a home in the Paddock Woods community of St. Louis County
for the sole reason that petitioner Joseph Lee Jones is a Negro. Relying in
part upon § 1982, the petitioners sought injunctive and other relief.1 The
District Court sustained the respondents' motion to dismiss the complaint,2
and the Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit affirmed, concluding that §
1982 applies only to state action and does not reach private refusals to
sell.3 We granted certiorari to consider the questions thus presented.4 For
the reasons that follow, we reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals. We
hold that § 1982 bars all racial discrimination, private as well as public, in
the sale or rental of property, and that the statute, thus construed, is a
valid exercise of the power of Congress to enforce the Thirteenth Amendment.5

I.

4

At the outset, it is important to make clear precisely what this case does not
involve. Whatever else it may be, 42 U.S.C. § 1982 is not a comprehensive open
housing law. In sharp contrast to the Fair Housing Title (Title VIII) of the
Civil Rights Act of 1968, Pub.L. 90--284, 82 Stat. 81, the statute in this
case deals only with racial discrimination and does not address itself to
discrimination on grounds of religion or national origin.6 It does not deal
specifically with discrimination in the provision of services or facilities in
connection with the sale or rental of a dwelling.7 It does not prohibit
advertising or other representations that indicate discriminatory
preferences.8 It does not refer explicitly to discrimination in financing
arrangements9 or in the provision of brokerage services.10 It does not empower
a federal administrative agency to assist aggrieved parties.11 It makes no
provision for intervention by the Attorney General.12 And, although it can be
enforced by injunction,13 it contains no provision expressly authorizing a
federal court to order the payment of damages.14

5

Thus, although § 1982 contains none of the exemptions that Congress included
in the Civil Rights Act of 1968,15 it would be a serious mistake to suppose
that § 1982 in any way diminishes the significance of the law recently enacted
by Congress. Indeed, the Senate Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Affairs was
informed in hearings held after the Court of Appeals had rendered its decision
in this case that § 1982 might well be 'a presently valid federal statutory
ban against discrimination by private persons in the sale or lease of real
property.'16 The Subcommittee was told, however, that even if this Court
should so construe § 1982, the existence of that statute would not 'eliminate
the need for congressional action' to spell out 'responsibility on the part of
the federal government to enforce the rights it protects.'17 The point was
made that, in light of the many difficulties confronted by private litigants
seeking to enforce such rights on their own, 'legislation is needed to
establish federal machinery for enforcement of the rights guaranteed under
Section 1982 of Title 42 even if the plaintiffs in Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer
Company should prevail in the United States Supreme Court.'18

6

On April 10, 1968, Representative Kelly of New York focused the attention of
the House upon the present case and its possible significance. She described
the background of this litigation, recited the text of § 1982, and then added:

7

'When the Attorney General was asked in court about the effect of the old law
(§ 1982) as compared with the pending legislation which is being considered on
the House floor today, he said that the scope was somewhat different, the
remedies and procedures were different, and that the new law was still quite
necessary.'19

8

Later the same day, the House passed the Civil Rights Act of 1968. Its
enactment had no effect upon § 198220 and no effect upon this litigation,21
but it underscored the vast differences between, on the one hand, a general
statute applicable only to racial discrimination in the rental and sale of
property and enforceable only by private parties acting on their own
initiative, and, on the other hand, a detailed housing law, applicable to a
broad range of discriminatory practices and enforceable by a complete arsenal
of federal authority. Having noted these differences, we turn to a
consideration of § 1982 itself.

II.

9

This Court last had occasion to consider the scope of 42 U.S.C. § 1982 in
1948, in Hurd v. Hodge, 334 U.S. 24, 68 S.Ct. 847, 92 L.Ed. 1187. That case
arose when property owners in the District of Columbia sought to enforce
racially restrictive covenants against the Negro purchasers of several homes
on their block. A federal district court enforced the restrictive agreements
by declaring void the deeds of the Negro purchasers. It enjoined further
attempts to sell or lease them the properties in question and directed them to
'remove themselves and all of their personal belongings' from the premises
within 60 days. The Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
affirmed.22 and this Court granted certiorari23 to decide whether § 1982, then
§ 1978 of the Revised Statutes of 1874, barred enforcement of the racially
restrictive agreements in that case.

10

The agreements in Hurd covered only two-thirds of the lots of a single city
block, and preventing Negroes from buying or renting homes in that specific
area would not have rendered them ineligible to do so elsewhere in the city.
Thus, if § 1982 had been thought to do no more than grant Negro citizens the
legal capacity to buy and rent property free of prohibitions that wholly
disabled them because of their race, judicial enforcement of the restrictive
covenants at issue would not have violated § 1982\. But this Court took a
broader view of the statute. Although the covenants could have been enforced
without denying the general right of Negroes to purchase or lease real estate,
the enforcement of those covenants would nonetheless have denied the Negro
purchasers 'the same right 'as is enjoyed by white citizens * * * to inherit,
purchase, lease, sell, hold, and convey real and personal property." 334 U.S.,
at 34, 68 S.Ct., at 852. That result, this Court concluded, was prohibited by
s 1982. To suggest otherwise, the Court said, 'is to reject the plain meaning
of language.' Ibid.

11

Hurd v. Hodge, supra, squarely held, therefore, that a Negro citizen who is
denied the opportunity to purchase the home he wants '(s)olely because of
(his) race and color,' 334 U.S., at 34, 68 S.Ct., at 852, has suffered the
kind of injury that § 1982 was designed to prevent. Accord, Buchanan v.
Warley, 245 U.S. 60, 79, 38 S.Ct. 16, 19, 62 L.Ed. 149; Harmon v. Tyler, 273
U.S. 668, 47 S.Ct. 471, 71 L.Ed. 831; City of Richmond v. Deans, 281 U.S. 704,
50 S.Ct. 407, 74 L.Ed. 1128. The basic source of the injury in Hurd was, of
course, the action of private individuals--white citizens who had agreed to
exclude Negroes from a residential area. But an arm of the Government--in that
case, a federal court had assisted in the enforcement of that agreement.24
Thus Hurd v. Hodge, supra, did not present the question whether purely private
discrimination, unaided by any action on the part of government, would violate
§ 1982 if its effect were to deny a citizen the right to rent or buy property
solely because of his race or color.

12

The only federal court (other than the Court of Appeals in this case) that has
ever squarely confronted that question held that a wholly private conspiracy
among white citizens to prevent a Negro from leasing a farm violated § 1982\.
United States v. Morris, D.C., 125 F. 322. It is true that a dictum in Hurd
said that § 1982 was directed only toward 'governmental action,' 334 U.S., at
31, 68 S.Ct., at 851, but neither Hurd nor any other case before or since has
presented that precise issue for adjudication in this Court.25 Today we face
that issue for the first time.

13

It is true that a dictum in Hurd v. Hodge, 334 U.S. 24, 31, 68 S.Ct. 847, 851,
charracterized Corrigan v. Buckley, 271 U.S. 323, 46 S.Ct. 521, 70 L.Ed. 969,
as having 'held' that '(t)he action toaward which the provisions of the
statute * * * (are) directed is governmental action.' 334 U.S., at 31, 68
S.Ct., at 851. But no such statement appears in the Corrigan opinion, and a
careful examination of Corrigan reveals that it cannot be read as authority
for the proposition attributed to it in Hurd. In Corrigan, suits had been
brought to enjoin a threatened violation of certain restrictive covenants in
the District of Columbia. The courts of the District had granted relief, see
55 App.D.C. 30, 299 F. 899, and the case reached this Court on appeal. As the
opinion in Corrigan specifically recognized, no claim that the covenants could
not validly be enforced against the appellants had been raised in the lower
courts, and no such claim was properly before this Court. 271 U.S., at 330--
331, 46 S.Ct., at 523--524\. The only question presented for decision was
whether the restrictive covenants themselves violated the Fifth, Thirteenth,
and Fourteenth Amendments, and §§ 1977, 1978, and 1979 of the Revised Statutes
(now 42 U.S.C. §§ 1981, 1982, and 1983). Ibid. Addressing itself to that
narrow question, the Court said that none of the provisions relied upon by the
appellants prohibited private individuals from 'enter(ing) into * * *
(contracts) in respect to the control and disposition of their own property.'
Id., at 331, 46 S.Ct., at 524. Nor, added the Court, had the appellants even
claimed that the provisions in question 'had, in and of themselves, * * *
(the) effect' of prohibiting such contracts. Ibid.

14

Even if Corrigan should be regarded as an adjudication that 42 U.S.C. § 1982
(then § 1978 of the Revised Statutes) does not prohibit private individuals
from agreeing not to sell their property to Negroes, Corrigan would not settle
the question whether § 1982 prohibits an actual refusal to sell to a Negro.
Moreover, since the appellants in Corrigan had not even argued in this Court
that the statute prohibited private agreements of the sort there involved, it
would be a mistake to treat the Corrigan decision as a considered judgment
even on that narrow issue.

III.

15

We begin with the language of the statute itself. In plain and unambiguous
terms, § 1982 grants to all citizens, without regard to race or color, 'the
same right' to purchase and lease property 'as is enjoyed by white citizens.'
As the Court of Appeals in this case evidently recognized, that right can be
impaired as effectively by 'those who place property on the market'26 as by
the State itself. For, even if the State and its agents lend no support to
those who wish to exclude persons from their communities on racial grounds,
the fact remains that, whenever property 'is placed on the market for whites
only, whites have a right denied to Negroes.'27 So long as a Negro citizen who
wants to buy or rent a home can be turned away simply because he is not white,
he cannot be said to enjoy 'the same right * * * as is enjoyed by white
citizens * * * to * * * purchase (and) lease * * * real and personal
property.' 42 U.S.C. § 1982\. (Emphasis added.)

16

On its face, therefore, § 1982 appears to prohibit all discrimination against
Negroes in the sale or rental of property discrimination by private owners as
well as discrimination by public authorities. Indeed, even the respondents
seem to concede that, if § 1982 'means what it says'--to use the words of the
respondents' brief--then it must encompass every racially motivated refusal to
sell or rent and cannot be confined to officially sanctioned segregationin
housing. Stressing what they consider to be the revolutionary implications of
so literal a reading of § 1982, the respondents argue that Congress cannot
possibly have intended any such result. Our examination of the relevant
history, however, persuades us that Congress meant exactly what it said.

IV.

17

In its original form, 42 U.S.C. § 1982 was part of § 1 of the Civil Rights Act
of 1866.28 That section was cast in sweeping terms:

18

'Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States
of America in Congress assembled, That all persons born in the United States
and not subject to any foreign power, * * * are hereby declared to be citizens
of the United States; and such citizens, of every race and color, without
regard to any previous condition of slavery or involuntary servitude, * * *
shall have the same right, in every State and Territory in the United States,
to make and enforce contracts, to sue, be parties, and give evidence, to
inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold, and convey real and personal property,
and to full and equal benefit of all laws and proceedings for the security of
person and property, as is enjoyed by white citizens, and shall be subject to
like punishment, pains, and penalties, and to none other, any law, statute,
ordinance, regulation, or custom, to the contrary notwithstanding.'29

19

The crucial language for our purposes was that which guaranteed all citizens
'the same right, in every State and Territory in the United States, * * * to
inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold, and convey real and personal property *
* * as is enjoyed by white citizens * * *.' To the Congress that passed the
Civil Rights Act of 1866, it was clear that the right to do these things might
be infringed not only by 'State or local law' but also by 'custom, or
prejudice.'30 Thus, when Congress provided in § 1 of the Civil Rights Act that
the right to purchase and lease property was to be enjoyed equally throughout
the United States by Negro and white citizens alike, it plainly meant to
secure that right against interference from any source whatever, whether
governmental or private.31

20

Indeed, if § 1 had been intended to grant nothing more than an immunity from
governmental interference, then much of § 2 would have made no sense at all.32
For that section, which provided fines and prison terms for certain
individuals who deprived others of rights 'secured or protcted' by § 1, was
carefully drafted to exempt private violations of § 1 from the criminal
sanctions it imposed.33 There would, of course, have been no private
violations to exempt if the only 'right' granted by § 1 had been a right to be
free of discrimination by public officials. Hence the structure of the 1866
Act, as well as its language, points to the conclusion urged by the
petitioners in this case that § 1 was meant to prohibit all racially motivated
deprivations of the rights enumerated in the statute, although only those
deprivations perpetrated 'under color of law' were to be criminally punishable
under § 2.

21

In attempting to demonstrate the contrary, the respondents rely heavily upon
the fact that the Congress which approved the 1866 statute wished to eradicate
the recently enacted Black Codes laws which had saddled Negroes with 'onerous
disabilities and burdens, and curtailed their rights * * * to such an extent
that their freedom was of little value * * *.' Slaughter-House Cases, 16 Wall.
36, 70, 21 L.Ed. 394.34 The respondents suggest that the only evil Congress
sought to eliminate was that of racially discriminatory laws in the former
Confederate States. But the Civil Rights Act was drafted to apply throughout
the country,35 and its language was far broader than would have been necessary
to strike down discriminatory statutes.

22

That broad language, we are asked to believe, was a mere slip of the
legislative pen. We disagree. For the same Congress that wanted to do away
with the Black Codes also had before it an imposing body of evidence pointing
to the mistreatment of Negroes by private individuals and unofficial groups,
mistreatment unrelated to any hostile state legislation. 'Accounts in
newspapers North and South, Freedmen's Bureau and other official documents,
private reports and correspondence were all adduced' to show that 'private
outrage and atrocity' were 'daily inflicted on freedmen * * *.'36 The
congressional debates are replete with references to private injustices
against Negroes--references to white employers who refused t pay their Negro
workers,37 white planters who agreed among themselves not to hire freed slaves
without the permission of their former masters,38 white citizens who assaulted
Negroes39 or who combined to drive them out of their communities.40

23

Indeed, one of the most comprehensive studies then before Congress stressed
the prevalence of private hostility toward negroes and the need to protect
them from the resulting persecution and discrimination.41 The report noted the
existence of laws virtually prohibiting Negroes from owning or renting
property in certain towns,42 but described such laws as 'mere isolated cases,'
representing 'the local outcroppings of a spirit * * * found to prevail
everywhere'43--a spirit expressed, for example, by lawless acts of brutality
directed against Negroes who traveled to areas where they were not wanted.44
The report concluded that, even if anti-Negro legislation were 'repealed in
all the States lately in rebellion,' equal treatment for the Negro would not
yet be secured.45

24

In this setting, it would have been strange indeed if Congress had viewed its
task as encompassing merely the nullification of racist laws in the former
rebel States. That the Congress which assembled in the Nation's capital in
December 1865 in fact had a broader vision of the task before it became clear
early in the session, when three proposals to invalidate discriminatory state
statutes were rejected as 'to narrowly conceived.'46 From the outset it seemed
clear, at least to Senator Trumbull of Illinois, Chairman of the Judiciary
Committee, that stronger legislation might prove necessary. After Senator
Wilson of Massachusetts had introduced his bill to strike down all racially
discriminatory laws in the South,47 Senator Trumbull said this:

25

'I reported from the Judiciary Committee the second section of the (Thirteenth
Amendment) for the very purpose of conferring upon Congress authority to see
that the first section was carried out in good faith * * * and I hold that
under that second section Congress will have the authority, when the
constitutional amendment is adopted, not only to pass the bill of the Senator
from Massachusetts, but a bill that will be much more efficient to protect the
freedman in his rights. * * * And, sir, when the constitutional amendment
shall have been adopted, if the information from the South be that the men
whose liberties are secured by it are deprived of the privilege to go and come
when they please, to buy and sell when they please, to make contracts and
enforce contracts, I give notice that, if no one else does, I shall introduce
a bill and urge its passage through Congress that will secure to those men
every one of these rights: they would not be freemen without them. It is idle
to say that a man is free who cannot go and come at pleasure, who cannot buy
and sell, who cannot enforce his rights. * * * (So) when the constitutional
amendment is adopted I trust we may pass a bill, if the action of the people
in the southern States should make it necessary, that will be much more
sweeping and efficient than the bill under consideration.'48

26

Five days later, on December 18, 1865, the Secretary of State officially
certified the ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment. The next day Senator
Trumbull again rose to speak. He had decided, he said, that the 'more sweeping
and efficient' bill of which he had spoken previously ought to be enacted

27

'at an early day for the purpose of quieting apprehensions in the minds of
many friends of freedom lest by local legislation or a prevailing public
sentiment in some of the States persons of the African race should continue to
be oppressed and in fact deprived of their freedom * * *.'49

28

On January 5, 1866, Senator Trumbull introduced the bill he had in mind--the
bill which later became the Civil Rights Act of 1866.50 He described its
objectives in terms that belie any attempt to read it narrowly:

29

'Mr. President, I regard the bill to which the attention of the Senate is now
called as the most important measure that has been under its consideration
since the adoption of the constitutional amendment abolishing slavery. That
amendment declared that all persons in the United States should be free. This
measure is intended to give effect to that declaration and secure to all
persons within the United States practical freedom. There is very little
importance in the general declaration of abstract truths and principles unless
they can be carried into effect, unless the persons who are to be affected by
them have some means of availing themselves of their benefits.'51

30

Of course, Senator Trumbull's bill would, as he pointed out, 'destroy all
(the) discriminations' embodied in the Black Codes,52 but it would do more: It
would affirmatively secure for all men, whatever their race or color, what the
Senator called the 'great fundamental rights':

31

'the right to acquire property, the right to go and come at pleasure, the
right to enforce rights in the courts, to make contracts, and to inherit and
dispose of property.'53

32

As to those basic civil rights, the Senator said, the bill would 'break down
all discrimination between black men and white men.'54

33

That the bill would indeed have so sweeping an effect was seen as its great
virtue by its friends55 and as its great danger by its enemies56 but was
disputed by none. Opponents of the bill charged that it would not only
regulate state laws but would directly 'determine the persons who (would)
enjoy * * * property within the States.'57 threatening the ability of white
citizens 'to determine who (would) be members of (their) communit(ies) * *
*.'58 The bill's advocates did not deny the accuracy of those
characterizations. Instead, they defended the propriety of employing federal
authority to deal with 'the white man * * * (who) would invoke the power of
local prejudice' against the Negro.59 Thus, when the Senate passed the Civil
Rights Act on February 2, 1866,60 it did so fully aware of the breadth of the
measure it had approved.

34

In the House, as in the Senate, much was said about eliminating the infamous
Black Codes.61 But, like the Senate, the House was moved by a larger objective
--that of giving real content to the freedom guaranteed by the Thirteenth
Amendment. Representative Thayer of Pennsylvania put it this way:

35

'(W)hen I voted for the amendment to abolish slavery * * * I did not suppose
that I was offering * * * a mere paper guarantee. And when I voted for the
second section of the amendment, I felt * * * certain that I had * * * given
to Congress ability to protect * * * the rights which the first section gave *
* *.'

36

'The bill which now engages the attention of the House has for its object to
carry out and guaranty the reality of that great measure. It is to give to it
practical effect and force. It is to prevent that great measure from remaining
a dead letter upon the constitutional page of this country. * * * The events
of the last four years * * * have changed (a) large class of people * * * from
a condition of slavery to that of freedom. The practical question now to be
decided is whether they shall be in fact freemen. It is whether they shall
have the benefit of this great charter of liberty given to them by the
American people.'62

37

Representative Cook of Illinois thought that, without appropriate federal
legislation, any 'combination of men in (a) neighborhood (could) prevent (a
Negro) from having any chance' to enjoy those benefits.63 To Congressman Cook
and others like him, it seemed evident that, with respect to basic civil
rights including the 'right to * * * purchase, lease, sell, hold, and convey *
* * property,' Congress must provide that 'there * * * be no discrimination'
on grounds of race or color.64

38

It thus appears that, when the House passed the Civil Rights Act on March 13,
1866,65 it did so on the same assumption that had prevailed in the Senate: It
too believed that it was approving a comprehensive statute forbidding all
racial discrimination affecting the basic civil rights enumerated in the Act.

39

President Andrew Johnson vetoed the Act on March 27,66 and in the brief
congressional debate that followed, his supporters characterized its reach in
allembracing terms. One stressed the fact that § 1 would confer 'the right * *
* to purchase * * * real estate * * * without any qualification and without
any restriction whatever * * *.'67 Another predicted, as a corollary, that the
Act would preclude preferential treatment for white persons in the rental of
hotel rooms and in the sale of church pews.68 Those observations elicited no
reply. On April 6 the Senate, and on April 9 the House, overrode the
President's veto by the requisite majorities,69 and the Civil Rights Act of
1866 became law.70

40

In light of the concerns that led Congress to adopt it and the contents of the
debates that proceded its passage, it is clear that the Act was designed to do
just what its terms suggest: to prohibit all racial discrimination, whether or
not under color of law, with respect to the rights enumerated therein--
including the right to purchase or lease property.

41

Nor was the scope of the 1866 Act altered when it was re-enacted in 1870, some
two years after the ratification of the Fourteenth Amendment.71 It is quite
true that some members of Congress supported the Fourteenth Amendment 'in
order to eliminate doubt as to the constitutional validity of the Civil Rights
Act as applied to the States.' Hurd v. Hodge, 334 U.S. 24, 32--33, 68 S.Ct.
847, 852. But it certainly does not follow that the adoption of the Fourteenth
Amendment or the subsequent readoption of the Civil Rights Act were meant
somehow to limit its application to state action. The legislative history
furnishes not the slightest factual basis for any such speculation, and the
conditions prevailing in 1870 make it highly implausible. For by that time
most, if not all, of the former Confederate States, then under the control of
'reconstructed' legislatures, had formally repudiated racial discrimination,
and the focus of congressional concern had clearly shifted from hostile
statutes to the activities of groups like the Ku Klux Klan, operating wholly
outside the law.72

42

Against this background, it would obviously make no sense to assume, without
any historical support whatever, that Congress made a silent decision in 1870
to exempt private discrimination from the operation of the Civil Rights Act of
1866.73 'The cardinal rule is that repeals by implication are not favored.'
Posadas v. National City Bank, 296 U.S. 497, 503, 56 S.Ct. 349, 352, 80 L.Ed.
351. All Congress said in 1870 was that the 1866 law 'is hereby re-enacted.'
That is all Congress meant.

43

As we said in a somewhat different setting two Terms ago, 'We think that
history leaves no doubt that, if we are to give (the law) the scope that its
origins dictate, we must accord it a sweep as broad as its language.' United
States v. Price, 383 U.S. 787, 801, 86 S.Ct. 1152, 1160. 'We are not at
liberty to seek ingenious analytical instruments,' ibid., to carve from § 1982
an exception for private conduct--even though its application to such conduct
in the present context is without established precedent. And, as the Attorney
General of the United States said at the oral argument of this case, 'The fact
that the statute lay partially dormant for many years cannot be held to
diminish its force today.'

V.

44

The remaining question is whether Congress has power under the Constitution to
do what § 1982 purports to do: to prohibit all racial discrimination, private
and public, in the sale and rental of property. Our starting point is the
Thirteenth Amendment, for it was pursuant to that constitutional provision
that Congress originally enacted what is now § 1982\. The Amendment consists
of two parts. Section 1 states:

45

'Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime
whereby the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the
United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction.'

Section 2 provides:

46

'Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate
legislation.'

47

As its text reveals, the Thirteenth Amendment 'is not a mere prohibition of
state laws establishing or upholding slavery, but an absolute declaration that
slavery or involuntary servitude shall not exist in any part of the United
States.' Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3, 20, 3 S.Ct. 18, 28, 27 L.Ed. 835. It
has never been doubted, therefore, 'that the power vested in Congress to
enforce the article by appropriate legislation,' ibid., includes the power to
enact laws 'direct and primary, operating upon the acts of individuals,
whether sanctioned by state legislation or not.' Id., at 23, 3 S.Ct., at 30.74

48

Thus, the fact that § 1982 operates upon the unofficial acts of private
individuals, whether or not sanctioned by state law, presents no
constitutional problem. If Congress has power under the Thirteenth Amendment
to eradicate conditions that prevent Negroes from buying and renting property
because of their race or color, then no federal statute calculated to achieve
that objective can be thought to exceed the constitutional power of Congress
simply because it reaches beyond state action to regulate the conduct of
private individuals. The constitutional question in this case, therefore,
comes to this: Does the authority of Congress to enforce the Thirteenth
Amendment 'by appropriate legislation' include the power to eliminate all
racial barriers to the acquisition of real and personal property? We think the
answer to that question is plainly yes.

49

'By its own unaided force and effect,' the Thirteenth Amendment 'abolished
slavery, and established universal freedom.' Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3,
20, 3 S.Ct. 18, 28. Whether or not the Amendment itself did any more than that
--a question not involved in this case--it is at least clear that the Enabling
Clause of that Amendment empowered Congress to do much more. For that clause
clothed 'Congress with power to pass all laws necessary and proper for
abolishing all badges and incidents of slavery in the United States.' Ibid.
(Emphasis added.)

50

Those who opposed passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1866 argued in effect
that the Thirteenth Amendment merely authorized Congress to dissolve the legal
bond by which the Negro slave was held to his master.75 Yet many had earlier
opposed the Thirteenth Amendment on the very ground that it would give
Congress virtually unlimited power to enact laws for the protection of Negroes
in every State.76 And the majority leaders in Congress--who were, after all,
the authors of the Thirteenth Amendment--had no doubt that its Enabling Clause
contemplated the sort of positive legislation that was embodied in the 1866
Civil Rights Act. Their chief spokesman, Senator Trumbull of Illinois, the
Chairman of the Judiciary Committee, had brought the Thirteenth Amendment to
the floor of the Senate in 1864. In defending the constitutionality of the
1866 Act, he argued that, if the narrower construction of the Enabling Clause
were correct, then

51

'the trumpet of freedom that we have been blowing throughout the land has
given an (uncertain sound,' and the promised freedom is a delusion. Such was
not the intention of Congress, which proposed the constitutional amendment,
nor is such the fair meaning of the amendment itself. * * * I have no doubt
that under this provision * * * we may destroy all these discriminations in
civil rights against the black man; and if we cannot, our constitutional
amendment amounts to nothing. It was for that purpose that the second clause
of that amendment was adopted, which says that Congress shall have authority,
by appropriate legislation, to carry into effect the article prohibiting
slavery. Who is to decide what that appropriate legislation is to be? The
Congress of the United States; and it is for Congress to adopt such
appropriate legislation as it may think proper, so that it be a means to
accomplish the end.'77

52

Surely Senator Trumbull was right. Surely Congress has the power under the
Thirteenth Amendment rationally to determine what are the badges and the
incidents of slavery, and the authority to translate that determination into
effective legislation. Nor can we say that the determination Congress has made
is an irrational one. For this Court recognized long ago that, whatever else
they may have encompassed, the badges and incidents of slavery--its 'burdens
and disabilities'--included restrations upon 'those fundamental rights which
are the essence of civil freedom, namely, the same right * * * to inherit,
purchase, lease, sell and convey property, as is enjoyed by white citizens.'
Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3, 22, 3 S.Ct. 18, 29.78 Just as the Black Codes,
enacted after the Civil War to restrict the free exercise of those rights,
were substitutes for the salve system, so the exclusion of Negroes from white
communities became a substitute for the Black Codes. And when racial
discrimination herds men into ghettos and makes their ability to buy property
turn on the color of their skin, then it too is a relic of slavery.

53

Negro citizens, North and South, who saw in the Thirteenth Amendment a promise
of freedom--freedom to 'go and come at pleasure'79 and to 'buy and sell when
they please'80--would be left with 'a more paper guarantee'81 if Congress were
powerless to assure that a dollar in the hands of a Negro will purchase the
same thing as a dollar in the hands of a white man. At the very least, the
freedom that Congress is empowered to secure under the Thirteenth Amendment
includes the freedom to buy whatever a white man can buy, the right to live
wherever a white man can live. If Congress cannot say that being a free man
means at least this much, then the Thirteenth Amendment made a promise the
Nation cannot keep.

54

Representative Wilson of Iowa was the floor manager in the House for the Civil
Rights Act of 1866. In urging that Congress had ample authority to pass the
pending bill, he recalled the celebrated words of Chief Justice Marshall in
McCulloch v. State of Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 421, 4 L.Ed. 579:

55

'Let the end by legitimate, let it be within the scope of the constitution,
and all means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end,
which are not prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the
constitution, are constitutional.'82

56

'The end is legitimate,' the Congressman said, 'because it is defined by the
Constitution itself. The end is the maintenance of freedom * * *. A man who
enjoys the civil rights mentioned in this bill cannot be reduced to slavery. *
* * This settles the appropriateness of this measure, and that settles its
constitutionality.'83

57

We agree. The judgment is reversed.

58

Reversed.

59

Mr. Justice DOUGLAS, concurring.

60

The Act of April 9, 1866, 14 Stat. 27, 42 U.S.C. § 1982, provides: 'All
citizens of the United States shall have the same right, in every State and
Territory, as is enjoyed by white citizens thereof to inherit, purchase,
lease, sell, hold, and convey real and personal property.'

61

This Act was passed to enforce the Thirteenth Amendment which in § 1 abolished
'slavery' and 'involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof
the party shall have been duly convicted' and in § 2 gave Congress power 'to
enforce this article by appropriate legislation.'

62

Enabling a Negro to buy and sell real and personal property is a removal of
one of many badges of slavery.

63

'Slaves were not considered men. * * * They could own nothing; they could make
no contracts; they could hold no property, nor traffic in property; they could
not hire out; they could not legally marry nor constitute families; they could
not control their children; they could not appeal from their master; they
could be punished at will.' W. Dubois, Black Reconstruction in America 10
(1964).1

64

The true curse of slavery is not what it did to the black man, but what it has
done to the white man. For the existence of the institution produced the
notion that the white man was of superior character, intelligence, and
morality. The blacks were little more than livestock--to be fed and fattened
for the economic benefits they could bestow through their labors, and to be
subjected to authority, often with cruelty, to make clear who was master and
who slave.

65

Some badges of slavery remain today. While the institution has been outlawed,
it has remained in the minds and hearts of many white men. Cases which have
come to this Court depict a spectacle of slavery unwilling to die. We have
seen contrivances by States designed to thwart Negro voting, e.g., Lane v.
Wilson, 307 U.S. 268, 59 S.Ct. 872, 83 L.Ed. 1281. Negroes have been excluded
over and again from juries solely on account of their race, e.g., Strauder v.
West Virginia, 100 U.S. 303, 25 L.Ed. 664, or have been forced to sit in
segregated seats in courtrooms, Johnson v. State of Virginia, 373 U.S. 61, 83
S.Ct. 1053, 10 L.Ed.2d 195. They have been made to attend segregated and
inferior schools, e.g., Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483, 74 S.Ct.
686, 98 L.Ed. 873, or been denied entrance to colleges or graduate schools
because of their color, e.g., Commonwealth of Pennsylvania v. Board of
Directors of City of Trusts, 353 U.S. 230, 77 S.Ct. 806, 1 L.Ed.2d 792; Sweatt
v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629, 70 S.Ct. 848, 94 L.Ed. 1114. Negroes have been
prosecuted for marrying whites, e.g., Loving v. Commonwealth Virginia, 388
U.S. 1, 87 S.Ct. 1817, 18 L.Ed.2d 1010. They have been forced to live in
segregated residential districts, Buchanan v. Warley, 245 U.S. 60, 38 S.Ct.
16, 62 L.Ed. 149 and residents of white neighborhoods have denied them
entrance, e.g., Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 U.S. 1, 68 S.Ct. 836, 92 L.Ed. 1161.
Negroes have been forced to use segregated facilities in going about their
daily lives, having been excluded from railway coaches, Plessy v. Ferguson,
163 U.S. 537, 16 S.Ct. 1138, 41 L.Ed. 256; public parks, New Orleans City Park
Improvement Assn. v. Detiege, 358 U.S. 54, 79 S.Ct. 99, 3 L.Ed.2d 46;
restaurants, Lombard v. State of Louisiana, 373 U.S. 267, 83 S.Ct. 1122, 10
L.Ed.2d 338; public beaches, Mayor and City Council of Baltimore v. Dawson,
350 U.S. 877, 76 S.Ct. 133, 100 L.Ed. 774; municipal golf courses, Holmes v.
City of Atlanta, 350 U.S. 879, 76 S.Ct. 141, 100 L.Ed. 776; amusement parks,
Griffin v. State of Maryland, 378 U.S. 130, 84 S.Ct. 1770, 12 L.Ed.2d 754;
buses, Gayle v. Browder, 352 U.S. 903, 77 S.Ct. 145, 1 L.Ed.2d 114; public
libraries, Brown v. State of Louisiana, 383 U.S. 131, 86 S.Ct. 719, 15 L.Ed.2d
637. A state court judge in Alabama convicted a Negro woman of contempt of
court because she refused to answer him when he addressed her as 'Mary,'
although she had made the simple request to be called 'Miss Hamilton.'
Hamilton v. State of Alabama, 376 U.S. 650, 84 S.Ct. 982, 11 L.Ed.2d 979.

66

That brief sampling of discriminatory practices, many of which continue today,
stands almost as an annotation to what Frederick Douglass (1817--1895) wrote
nearly a century earlier:

67

'Of all the races and varieties of men which have suffered from this feeling,
the colored people of this country have endured most. They can resort to no
disguises which will enable them to escape its deadly aim. They carry in front
the evidence which marks them for persecution. They stand at the extreme point
of difference from the Caucasian race, and their African origin can be
instantly recognized, though they may be several removes from the typical
African race. They may remonstrate like Shylock--'Hath not a Jew eyes? hath
not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions? fed with
the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to the same diseases,
healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same summer and winter, as
a Christian is?"--but such eloquence is unavailing. They are Negroes--and that
is enough, in the eye of this unreasoning prejudice, to justify indignity and
violence. In nearly every department of American life they are confronted by
this insidious influence. It fills the air. It meets them at the workshop and
factory, when they apply for work. It meets them at the church, at the hotel,
at the ballot-box, and worst of all, it meets them in the jurybox. Without
crime or offense against law or gospel, the colored man is the Jean Valjean of
American society. He has escaped from the galleys, and hence all presumptions
are against him. The workshop denies him work, and the inn denies him shelter;
the ballot-box a fair vote, and the jury-box a fair trial. He has ceased to be
the slave of an individual, but has in some sense become the slave of society.
He may not now be bought and sold like a beast in the market, but he is the
trammeled victim of a prejudice, well calculated to repress his manly
ambition, paralyze his energies, and make him a dejected and spiritless man,
if not a sullen enemy to society, fit to prey upon life and property and to
make trouble generally.'2

68

Today the black is protected by a host of civil rights laws. But the forces of
discrimination are still strong.

69

A member of his race, duly elected by the people to a state legislature, is
barred from that assembly because of his views on the Vietnam war. Bond v.
Floyd, 385 U.S. 116, 87 S.Ct. 339, 17 L.Ed.2d 235.

70

Real estate agents use artifice to avoid selling 'white property' to the
blacks.3 The blacks who travel the country, though entitled by law to the
facilities for sleeping and dining that are offered all tourists, Heart of
Atlanta Motel v. United States, 379 U.S. 241, 85 S.Ct. 348, 13 L.Ed.2d 258,
may well learn that the 'vacancy' sign does not mean what it says, especially
if the motel has a swimming pool.

71

On entering a half-empty restaurant they may find 'reserved' signs on all
unoccupied tables.

72

The black is often barred from a labor union because of his race.4

73

He learns that the order directing admission of his children into white
schools has not been obeyed 'with all deliberate speed,' Brown v. Board of
Education, 349 U.S. 294, 301, 75 S.Ct. 753, 756, 99 L.Ed. 1083 but has been
delayed by numerous stratagems and devices.5 State laws, at times, have been
encouraged discrimination in housing. Reitman v. Mulkey, 387 U.S. 369, 87
S.Ct. 1627, 18 L.Ed.2d 830.

74

This recital is enough to show how prejudices, once part and parcel of
slavery, still persist. The men who sat in Congress in 1866 were trying to
remove some of the badges or 'customs'6 of slavery when they enacted § 1982\.
And, as my Brother STEWART shows, the Congress that passed the so-called Open
Housing Act in 1968 did not undercut any of the grounds on which § 1982 rests.

75

Mr. Justice HARLAN, whom Mr. Justice WHITE joins, dissenting.

76

The decision in this case appears to me to be most ill-considered and
illadvised.

77

The petitioners argue that the respondents' racially motivated refusal to sell
them a house entitles them to judicial relief on two separate grounds. First,
they claim that the respondents acted in violation of 42 U.S.C. § 1982;
second, they assert that the respondents' conduct amounted in the
circumstances to 'state action'1 and was therefore forbidden by the Fourteenth
Amendment even in the absence of any statute. The Court, without reaching the
second ground alleged, holds that the petitioners are entitled to relief under
42 U.S.C. § 1982, and that § 1982 is constitutional as legislation appropriate
to enforce the Thirteenth Amendment.

78

For reasons which follow, I believe that the Court's construction of § 1982 as
applying to purely private action is almost surely wrong, and at the least is
open to serious doubt. The issues of the constitutionality of § 1982, as
construed by the Court, and of liability under the Fourteenth Amendment alone,
also present formidable difficulties. Moreover, the political processes of our
own era have, since the date of oral argument in this case, given birth to a
civil rights statute2 embodying 'fair housing' provisions3 which would at the
end of this year make available to others, though apparently not to the
petitioners themselves,4 the type of relief which the petitioners now seek. It
seems to me that this latter factor so diminishes the public importance of
this case that by far the wisest course would be for this Court to refrain
from decision and to dismiss the writ as improvidently granted.

I.

79

I shall deal first with the Court's construction of § 1982, which lies at the
heart of its opinion. That construction is that the statute applies to purely
private as well as to state-authorized discrimination.

A.

80

The Court's opinion focuses upon the statute's legislative history, but it is
worthy of note that the precedents in this Court are distinctly opposed to the
Court's view of the statute.

81

In the Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3, 3 S.Ct. 18, 27 L.Ed. 835, decided less
than two decades after the enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1866, from
which § 1982 is derived, the Court said in dictum of the 1866 Act:

82

'This law is clearly corrective in its character, intended to counteract and
furnish redress against state laws and proceedings, and customs having the
force of law, which sanction the wrongful acts specified. * * * The civil
rights bill here referred to is analogous in its character to what a law would
have been under the original constitution, declaring that the validity of
contracts should not be impaired, and that if any person bound by a contract
should refuse to comply with it, under color or pretence that it had been
rendered void or invalid by a state law, he should be liable to an action upon
it in the courts of the United States, with the addition of a penalty for
setting up such an unjust and unconstitutional defence.' Id., at 16--17, 3
S.Ct., at 25.5

83

In Corrigan v. Buckley, 271 U.S. 323, 46 S.Ct. 521, 70 L.Ed. 969, the question
was whether the courts of the District of Columbia might enjoin prospective
breaches of racially restrictive covenants. The Court held that it was without
jurisdiction to consider the petitioners' argument that the covenant was void
because it contravened the Fifth, Thirteenth, and Fourteenth Amendments and
their implementing statutes. The Court reasoned, inter alia, that the
statutes, including the immediate predecessor of § 1982,6 were inapplicable
because

84

'they, like the Constitutional Amendment under whose sanction they were
enacted, do not in any manner prohibit or invalidate contracts entered into by
private individuals in respect to the control and disposition of their own
property.' 271 U.S., at 331, 46 S.Ct. at 5247

85

In Hurd v. Hodge, 334 U.S. 24, 68 S.Ct. 847, 92 L.Ed. 1187, the issue was
again whether the courts of the District might enforce racially restrictive
covenants. At the outset of the process of reasoning by which it held that
judicial enforcement of such a covenant would violate the predecessor of §
1982, the Court said:

86

'We may start with the proposition that the statute does not invalidate
private restrictive agreements so long as the purposes of those agreements are
achieved by the parties through voluntary adherence to the terms. The action
toward which the provisions of the statute under consideration is (sic)
directed is governmental action. Such was the holding of Corrigan v. Buckley *
* * 334 U.S., at 31, 68 S.Ct., at 851.8

B.

87

Like the Court, I began analysis of § 1982 by examining its language. In its
present form, the section provides:

88

'All citizens of the United States shall have the same right, in every State
and Territory, as is enjoyed by white citizens thereof to inherit, purchase,
lease, sell, hold, and convey real and personal property.'

89

The Court finds it 'plain and unambiguous, ante, at 420, that this language
forbids purely private as well as stateauthorized discrimination. With all
respect, I do not find it so. For me, there is an inherent ambiguity in the
term 'right,' as used in § 1982\. The 'right' referred to may eithe be a right
to equal status under the law, in which case the statute operates only against
state-sanctioned discrimination, or it may be an 'absolute' right enforceable
against private individuals. To me, the words of the statute, taken alone,
suggest the former interpretation, not the latter.9

90

Further, since intervening revisions have not been meant to alter substance,
the intended meaning of § 1982 must be drawn from the words in which it was
originally enacted. Section 1982 originally was a part of § 1 of the Civil
Rights Act of 1866, 14 Stat. 27. Sections 1 and 2 of that Act provided in
relevant part:

91

'That all persons born in the United States and not subject to any foreign
power * * * are hereby declared to be citizens of the United States; and such
citizens, of every race and color * * *, shall have the same right, in every
State and Territory in the United States * * * to inherit, purchase, lease,
sell, hold, and convey real and personal property * * * as is enjoyed by white
citizens, and shall be subject to like punishment, pains, and penalties, and
to none other, any law, statute, ordinance, regulation, or custom, to the
contrary notwithstanding.

92

'Sec. 2. That any person who, under color of any law, statute, ordinance,
regulation, or custom, shall subject, or cause to be subjected, any inhabitant
of any State or Territory to the deprivation of any right secured or protected
by this act * * * shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor * * *.'

93

It seems to me that this original wording indicates even more strongly than
the present language that § 1 of the Act (as well as § 2, which is explicitly
so limited) was intended to apply only to action taken pursuant to state or
community authority, in the form of a 'law, statute, ordinance, regulation, or
custom.'10 And with deference I suggest that the language of § 2, taken alone,
no more implies that § 2 'was carefully drafted to exempt private violations
of § 1 from the criminal sanctions it imposed,' see ante, at 425, than its
does that § 2 was carefully drafted to enforce all of the rights secured by §
1.

C.

94

The Court rests its opinion chiefly upon the legislative history of the Civil
Rights Act of 1866. I shall endeavor to show that those debates do not, as the
Court would have it, overwhelmingly support the result reached by the Court,
and in fact that a contrary conclusion may equally well be drawn. I shall
consider the legislative history largely in chronological sequence, dealing
separately with the Senate and House debates.

95

The First Session of the Thirty-ninth Congress met on December 4, 1865, some
six months after the preceding Congress had sent to the States the Thirteenth
Amendment, and a few days before word was received of that Amendment's
ratification. On December 13, Senator Wilson introduced a bill which would
have invalidated all laws in the former rebel States which discriminated among
persons as to civil rights on the basis of color, and which would have made it
a misdemeanor to enact or enforce such a statute.11 On the same day, Senator
Trumbull said with regard to Senator Wilson's proposal:

96

'The bill does not go far enough, if what we have been told to-day in regard
to the treatment of freedmen in the southern States is true. * * * (U)ntil
(the Thirteenth Amendment) is adopted there may be some question * * * as to
the authority of Congress to pass such a bill as this, but after the adoption
of the constitutional amendment there can be none.

97

'The second clause of that amendment was inserted for some purpose, and I
would like to know * * * for what purpose? Sir, for the purpose, and none
other, of preventing State Legislatures from enslaving, under any pretense,
those whom the first clause declared should be free.'12

98

Senator Trumbull then indicated that he would introduce separate bills to
enlarge the powers of the recently founded Freedmen's Bureau and to secure the
freedmen in their civil rights, both bills in his view being authorized by the
second clause of the Thirteenth Amendment.13 Since he had just stated that the
purpose of that clause was to enable Congress to nullify acts of the state
legislatures, it seems inferable that this also also was to be the aim of the
promised bills.

99

On January 5, Senator Trumbull introduced both the Freedmen's bill and the
civil rights bill.14 The Freedmen's bill would have strengthened greatly the
existing system by which agents of the Freedmen's Bureau exercised protective
supervision over freedmen wherever they were present in large numbers. Inter
alia, the Freedmen's bill would have permitted the President, acting through
the Bureau, to extend 'military protection and jurisdiction' over all cases in
which persons in the former rebel States were

100

'in consequence of any State or local law, ordinance, police or other
regulation, custom, or prejudice, (denied or refused) any of the civil rights
or immunities belonging to white persons, including the right * * * to
inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold and convey real and personal property, *
* * on account of race * * *.'15

101

The next section of the Freedmen's bill provided that the agents of the
Freedmen's Bureau might try and convict of a misdemeanor any person who
deprived another of such rights on account of race and 'under color of any
State or local law, ordinance, police, or other regulation or custom * * *.'
Thus, the Freedmen's bill, which was generally limited in its application to
the Southern States and which was correspondingly more sweeping in its
protection of the freedmen than the civil rights bill,16 defined both the
right secured and the denials of those rights which were criminally punishable
in terms of acts done under the aegis of a State or locality. The only
significant distinction was that denials which occurred 'in consequence of a
State or local * * * prejudice' would have entitled the victim to military
protection but would not have been criminal. In the corresponding section of
the companion and generally parallel civil rights bill, which was to be
effective throughout the Nation, the reference to 'prejudice' was omitted from
the rights-defining section. This would seem to imply that the more widely
applicable civil rights bill was meant to provide protection only against
those discriminations which were legitimated by a state or community sanction
sufficiently powerful to deserve the name 'custom.'

102

The form of the Freedmen's bill also undercuts the Court's argument, ante, at
424, that if § 1 of the Civil Rights Act were construed as extending only to
'state action,' then 'much of § 2 (which) clearly was so limited) would have
made no sense at all.' For the similar structure of the companion Freedmen's
bill, drafted by the same hand and largely parallel in structure, would seem
to confirm that the limitation to 'state action' was deliberate.

103

The civil rights bill was debated intermittently in the Senate from January
12, 1866, until its eventual passage over the President's veto on April 6. In
the course of the debates, Senator Trumbull, who was by far the leading
spokesman for the bill, made a number of statements which can only be taken to
mean that the bill was aimed at 'state action' alone. For example, on January
29, 1866, Senator Trumbull began by citing a number of recently enacted
Southern laws depriving men of rights named in the bill. He stated that '(t)he
purpose of the bill under consideration is to destroy all these
discriminations, and carry into effect the constitutional amendment.'17 Later
the same day, Senator Trumbull quoted § 2 of the bill in full, and said:

104

'This is the valuable section of the bill so far as protecting the rights of
freedmen is concerned. * * * When it comes to be understood in all parts of
the United States that any person who shall deprive another of any right * * *
in consequence of his color or race will expose himself to fine and
imprisonment, I think such acts will soon cease.'18

105

These words contain no hint that the 'rights' protected by § 2 were intended
to be any less broad than those secured by § 1\. Of course, § 2 plainly
extended only to 'state action.' That Senator Trumbull viewed §§ 1 and 2 as
co-extensive appears even more clearly from his answer the following day when
asked by Senator Cowan whether there was 'not a provision (in the bill) by
which State officers are to be punished?' Senator Trumbull replied: 'Not State
officers especially, but everybody who violates the law. It is the intention
to punish everybody who violates the law.'19

106

On January 29, Senator Trumbull also uttered that first of several remarkably
similar and wholly unambiguous statements which indicated that the bill was
aimed only at 'state action.' He said:

107

'(This bill) may be assailed as drawing to the Federal Government powers that
properly belong to 'States'; but I apprehend, rightly considered, it is not
obnoxious to that objection. It will have no operation in any State where the
laws are equal, where all persons have the same civil rights without regard to
color or race. It will have no operation in the State of Kentucky when her
slave code and all her laws discriminating between persons on account of race
or color shall be abolished.'20

108

Senator Trumbull several times reiterated this view. On February 2, replying
to Senator Davis of Kentucky, he said:

109

'Why, sir, if the State of Kentucky makes no discrimination in civil rights
between its citizens, this bill has no operation whatever in the State of
Kentucky. Are all the rights of the people of Kentucky gone because they
cannot discriminate and punish one man for doing a thing that they do not
punish another for doing? The bill draws to the Federal Government no power
whatever if the States will perform their constitutional obligation.'21

110

On April 4, after the President's veto of the bill, Senator Trumbull stated
that 'If an offense is committed against a colored person simply because he is
colored, in a State where the law affords him the same protection as if he
were white, this act neither has nor was intended to have anything to do with
his case, because he has adequate remedies in the State courts * * *.'22 Later
the same day, he said:

111

'This bill in no manner interferes with the municipal regulations of any State
which protects all alike in their rights of person and property. It could have
no operation in Massachusetts, New York, Illinois, or most of the States of
the Union.'23

112

The remarks just quoted constitute the plainest possible statement that the
civil rights bill was intended to apply only to state-sanctioned conduct and
not to purely activate action. The Court has attempted to negate the force of
these statements by citing other declarations by Senator Trumbull and others
that the bill would operate everywhere in the country. See ante, at 426, n.
35. However, the obvious and natural way to reconcile these two sets of
statements is to read the ones about the bill's nationwide application as
declarations that the enactment of a racially discriminatory law in any State
would bring the bill into effect there.24 It seems to me that very great
weight must be given these statements of Senator Trumbull, for they were
clearly made to reassure Northern and Border State Senators about the extent
of the bill's operation in their States.

113

On April 4, Senator Trumbull gave two additional indications that the bill was
intended to reach only state-sanction action. The first occurred during
Senator Trumbull's defense of the part of § 3 of the bill which gave federal
courts jurisdiction 'of all causes, civil and criminal, affecting persons who
are denied or cannot enforce in the courts * * * of the State or locality
where they may be any of the rights secured to them by the first section of
this act * * *.' Senator Trumbull said:

114

'If it be necessary in order to protect the freedman in his rights that he
should have authority to go into the Federal courts in all cases where a
custom prevails in a State, or where there is a statute-law of the State
discriminating against him, I think we have the authority to confer that
jurisdiction under the second clause of the (Thirteenth Amendment).'25

115

If the bill had been intended to reach purely private discrimination it seems
very strange that Senator Trumbull did not think it necessary to defend the
surely more dubious federal jurisdiction over cases involving no state action
whatsoever. A few minutes later, Senator Trumbull reiterated that his reason
for introducing the civil rights bill was to bring about 'the passage of a law
by Congress, securing equality in civil rights when denied by State
authorities to freedmen and all other inhabitants of the United States * *
*.'26

116

Thus, the Senate debates contain many explicit statements by the bill's own
author, to whom the Senate naturally looked for an explanation of its terms,
indicating that the bill would prohibit only state-sanctioned discrimination.

117

The Court puts forward in support of its construction an impressive number of
quotations from and citations to the Senate debates. However, upon more
circumspect analysis than the Court has chosen to give, virtually all of these
appear to be either irrelevant or equally consistent with a 'state action'
interpretation. The Court's mention, ante, at 427, of a reference in the
Senate debates to 'white employers who refused to pay their Negro workers'
surely does not militate against a 'state action' construction, since 'state
action' would include conduct pursuant to 'custom,' and there was a very
strong 'custom' of refusing to pay slaves for work done. The Court's citation,
ante, at 427-428, of Senate references to 'white citizens who assaulted
Negroes' is not in point, for the debate cited by the Court concerned the
Freedmen's bill, not the civil rights bill.27 The former by its terms forbade
discrimination pursuant to 'prejudice,' as well as 'custom,' and in any event
neither bill provided a remedy for the victim of a racially motivated
assault.28

118

The Court's quotation, ante, at 429-430, of Senator Trumbull's December 13
reference to the then-embryonic civil rights bill is also compatible with a
'state action' interpretation, at least when it is recalled that the unedited
quotation, see supra, at 455, includes a statement that the second clause of
the Thirteenth Amendment, the authority for the proposed bill, was intended
solely as a check on state legislatures. Senator Trumbull's declaration the
following day that the forthcoming bill would be aimed at discrimination
pursuant to 'a prevailing public sentiment' as well as to legislation, see
ante, at 431, is also consistent with a 'state action' reading of the bill,
for the bill explicitly prohibited actions done under color of 'custom' as
well as of formal laws.

119

The three additional statements of Senator Trumbull and the remarks of
senatorial opponents of the bill, quoted by the Court, ante, at 431--433, to
show the bill's sweeping scope, are entirely ambiguous as to whether the
speakers thought the bill prohibited only state-sanctioned conduct or reached
wholly private action as well. Indeed, if the bill's opponents thought that it
would have the latter effect, it seems a little surprising that they did not
object more strenuously and explicitly.29 The remark of Senator Lane which is
quoted by the Court, ante, at 433, to prove that he viewed the bill as
reaching "the white man * * * (who) would invoke the power of local prejudice'
against the Negro,' seems to have been quoted out of context. The quotation is
taken from a part of Senator Lane's speech in which he defended the section of
the bill permitting the President to invoke military authority when necessary
to enforce the bill. After noting that there might be occasions '(w)here
organized resistance to the legal authority assumes that shape that the
officers cannot execute a writ,'30 Senator Lane concluded that 'if (the white
man) would invoke the power of local prejudice to override the laws of the
country, this is no Government unless the military may be called in to enforce
the order of the civil courts and obedience to the laws of the country.'31 It
seems to me manifest that, taken in context, this remark is beside the point
in this case.

120

The post-veto remarks of opponents of the bill, cited by the Court, ante, at
435, also are inconclusive. Once it is recognized that the word 'right' as
used in the bill is ambiguous, then Senator Cowan's statement, ante, at 435,
that the bill would confer 'the right * * * to purchase * * * real estate * *
*without any qualification'32 must inevitably share that ambiguity. The
remarks of Senator Davis, ibid., with respect to rental of hotel rooms and
sale of church pews are, when viewed in context, even less helpful to the
Court's thesis. For these comments were made immediately following Senator
Davis' plaintive acknowledgment that 'this measure proscribes all
discriminations * * * that may be made * * * by any 'ordinance, regulation, or
custom,' as well as by 'law or statute."33 Senator Davis then observed that
ordinances, regulations, and customs presently conferred upon white persons
the most comfortable accommodations in ships and steamboats, hotels, churches,
and railroad cars, and stated that '(t)his bill * * * declares all persons who
enforce these distinctions to be criminals against the United States * * *.'34
Thus, Senator Davis not only tied these obnoxious efects of the bill to its
'customs' provision but alleged that they were brought about by § 2 as well as
§ 1\. There is little wonder that his remarks 'elicited no reply,' see ibid.,
from the bill's supporters.

121

The House debates are even fuller of statements indicating that the civil
rights bill was intended to reach only state-endorsed discrimination.
Representative Wilson was the bill's sponsor in the House. On the very first
day of House debate, March 1, Representative Wilson said in explaining the
bill:

122

'(I)f the States, seeing that we have citizens of different races and colors,
would but shut their eyes to these differences and legislate, so far at least
as regards civil rights and immunities, as though all citizens were of one
race or color, our troubles as a nation would be well-nigh over. * * * It will
be observed that the entire structure of this bill rests on the discrimination
relative to civil rights and immunities made by the States on 'account of
race, color, or previous condition of slavery."35

123

A few minutes later, Representative Wilson said:

124

'Before our Constitution was formed, the great fundamental rights (which are
embodied in this bill) belonged to every person who became a member of our
great national family. * * * The entire machinery of government * * * was
designed, among other things, to secure a more perfect enjoyment of these
rights. * * * I assert that we possess the power to do those things which
Governments are organized to do; that we may protect a citizen of the United
States against a violation of his rights by the law of a single State; * * *
that this power permeates our whole system, is a part of it, without which the
States can run riot over every fundamental right belonging to citizens of the
United States * * *.'36

125

These statements surely imply that Representative Wilson believed the bill to
be aimed at state-sanctioned discrimination and not at purely private
discrimination, which of course existed unhindered '(b)efore our Constitution
was formed.'

126

Other congressmen expressed similar views. On March 2, Representative Thayer,
one of the bill's supporters, said:

127

'The events of the last four years * * * have changed (the freedmen) from a
condition of slavery to that of freedom. The practical question now to be
decided is whether they shall be in fact freemen. It is whether they shall
have the benefit of this great charter of liberty given to them by the
American people.

128

'Sir, if it is competent for the new-formed Legislatures of the rebel States
to enact laws * * * which declare, for example, that they shall not have the
privilege of purchasing a home for themselves and their families; * * * then I
demand to know, of what practical value is the amendment abolishing slavery *
* *?'37

A few minutes later, he said:

129

'Do you give freedom to a man when you allow him to be deprived of those great
natural rights to which every man is entitled by nature? * * * (W)hat kind of
freedom is that by which the man placed in a state of freedom is subject to
the tyranny of laws which deprive him of (those) rights * * *?'38

130

A little later, Representative Thayer added:

131

'(The freedmen) are entitled to the benefit of that guarantee of the
Constitutional which secures to every citizen the enjoyment of life, liberty,
and property, and no just reason exists why they should not enjoy the
protection of thatguarantee * * *.

132

'What is the necessity which gives occasion for that protection? Sir, in at
least six of the lately rebellious States the reconstructed Legislatures of
those States have enacted laws which, if permitted to be enforced, would
strike a fatal blow at the liberty of the freedmen * * *.'39

133

An opponent of the bill, Representative Bingham, said on March 9:

134

'(W)hat, then, is proposed by the provision of the first section? Simply to
strike down by congressional enactment every State constitution which makes a
discrimination on account of race or color in any of the civil rights of the
citizen.'40

135

Representative Shellabarger, a supporter of the bill, discussed it on the same
day. He began by stating that he had no doubt of the constitutionality of § 2
of the bill, provided Congress might enact § 1\. With respect to § 1, he said:

136

'Its whole effect is not to confer or regulate rights, but to require that
whatever of these enumerated rights and obligations are imposed by State laws
shall be for and upon all citizens alike * * *. Self-evidently this is the
whole effect of this first section. It secures * * * equality of protection in
those enumerated civil rights which the States may deem proper to confer upon
any races. * * * It must * * * be noted that the violations of citizens'
rights, which are reached and punished by this bill, are those which are
inflicted under 'color of law,' &c. The bill does not reach mere private
wrongs, but only those done under color of state authority * * *. (I)ts whole
force is expended in defeating an attempt, under State laws, to deprive races
and the members thereof as such of the rights enumerated in this act. This is
the whole of it.'41

137

Thus, Representative Shellabarger said in so many words that the bill had no
impact on 'mere private wrongs.'

138

After the President's veto of the bill, Representative Lawrence, a supporter,
stated his views. He said:

139

'The bill does not declare who shall or shall not have the right to sue, give
evidence, inherit, purchase, and sell property. These questions are left to
the States to determine, subject only to the limitation that there are some
inherent and inalienable rights pertaining to every citizen, which cannot be
abolished or abridged by State constitutions or laws. * * *

140

'Now, there are two ways in which a State may undertake to deprive citizens of
these * * * rights: either by prohibitory laws, or by a failure to protect any
one of them.

141

'If the people of a State should become hostile to a large class of
naturalized citizens and should enact laws to prohibit them and no other
citizens * * * from inheriting, buying, holding, or selling property, * * *
that would be prohibitory legislation. If the State should simply enact laws
for native-born citizens and provide no law under which naturalized citizens
could enjoy any one of these rights, and should deny them all protection by
civil process or penal enactments, that would be a denial of justice.'42

142

From this passage it would appear that Representative Lawrence conceived of
the word 'right' in § 1 of the bill as referring to a right to equal legal
status, and that he believed that the sole effect of the bill was to prohibit
state-imposed discrimination.

143

The Court quotes and cites a number of passages from the House debates in aid
of its construction of the bill. As in the case of the Senate debates, most of
these appear upon close examination to provide little support. The first
significant citation, ante, at 425, n. 33, is a dialogue between
Representative Wilson and Representative Loan, another of the bill's
supporters.

The full exchange went as follows:

144

'Mr. LOAN. Mr. Speaker, I * * * ask the chairman * * * why the committee limit
the provisions of the second section to those who act under the color of law.
Why not let them apply to the whole community where the acts are committed?

145

'Mr. WILSON, of Iowa. That grows out of the fact that there is discrimination
in reference to civil rights under the local laws of the States. Therefore we
provide that the persons who under the color of these local laws should do
these things shall be liable to this punishment.

146

'Mr. LOAN. What penalty is imposed upon others than officers who inflict these
wrongs on the citizen?

147

'Mr. WILSON, of Iowa. We are not making a general criminal code for the
States.

148

'Mr. LOAN. Why not abrogate those laws instead of inflicting penalties upon
officers who execute writs under them?

149

'Mr. WILSON, of Iowa. A law without a sanction is of very little force.

150

'Mr. LOAN. Then why not put it in the bill directly? 'Mr. WILSON, of Iowa.
That is what we are trying to do.'43

151

The interpretation which the Court places on Representative Wilson's remarks,
see ante, at 425, n. 33, is a conceivable one.44 However, it is equally likely
that, since both participants in the dialogue professed concern solely with §
2 of the bill, their remarks carried no implication about the scope of § 1\.
Moreover, it is possible to read the entire exchange as concerned with
discrimination in communities having discriminatory laws, with Representative
Loan urging that the laws should be abrogated directly or that all persons,
not merely officers, who discriminated pursuant to them should be criminally
punishable.

152

The next significant reliance upon the House debates is the Court's mention of
references in the debates 'to white employers who refused to pay their Negro
workers, white planters who agreed among themselves not to hire freed slaves
without the permission of their former masters, white citizens who assaulted
Negroes or who combined to drive them out of their communities.' Ante, at
427-428.45 (Footnotes omitted.) As was pointed out in the discussion of the
Senate debates, supra at 462, the references to white men's refusals to pay
freedmen and their agreements not to hire freedmen without their 'masters"
consent are by no means contrary to a 'state action' view of the civil rights
bill, since the bill expressly forbade action pursuant to 'custom' and both of
these practices reflected 'customs' from the time of slavery. The Court cites
two different House references to assaults on Negroes by whites. The first was
by Congressman Windom,46 and close examination reveals that his only mention
of assaults was with regard to a Texas 'pass system,' under which freedmen
were whipped if found abroad without passes, and a South Carolina law
permitting freedmen to be whipped for insolence.47 Since these assaults were
sanctioned by law, or at least by 'custom,' they would be reached by the bill
even under a 'state action' interpretation. The other allusion to assaults, as
well as the mention of combinations of whites to drive freedmen from
communities, occurred in a speech by Representative Lawrence.48 These
references were shortly preceded by the remarks of Congressman Lawrence
quoted, supra, at 468, and were immediately followed by his comment that 'If
States should undertake to authorize such offenses, or deny to a class of
citizens all protection against them, we may then inquire whether the nation
itself may be destroyed * * *.'49 These fore and aft remarks imply that
Congressman Lawrence's concern was that the activities referred to would
receive state sanction.

153

The Court, ante, at 428, n. 40, quotes a statement of Representative Eldridge,
an opponent of the bill, in which he mentioned references by the bill's
supporters to 'individual cases of wrong perpetrated upon the freedmen of the
South * * *.'50 However, up to that time there had been no mention whatever in
the House debates of any purely private discrimination,51 so one can only
conclude that by 'individual cases' Representative Eldridge meant isolated
cases,' not 'cases of purely private discrimination.'

154

The last significant reference52 by the Court to the House debates is its
statement, ante, at 434, that 'Representative Cook of Illinois thought that,
without appropriate federal legislation, any 'combination of men in (a)
neighborhood (could) prevent (a Negro) from having any chance' to enjoy' the
benefits of the Thirteenth Amendment. This quotation seems to be taken out of
context. What Representative Cook said was:

155

'(W)hen those rights which are enumerated in this bill are denied to any class
of men on account of race or color, when they are subject to a system of
vagrant laws which sells them into slavery or involuntary servitude, which
operates upon them as upon no other part of the community, they are not
secured in the rights of freedom. If a man can be sold, the man is a slave. If
he is nominally freed by the amendment to the Constitution, * * * he has
simply the labor of his hands on which he can depend. Any combination of men
in his neighborhood can prevent him from having any chance to support himself
by his labor. They can pass a law that a man not supporting himself by labor
shall be deemed a vagrant, and that a vagrant shall be sold.'53

156

These remarks clearly were addressed to discriminations effectuated by law, or
sanctioned by 'custom.' As such, they would have been reached by the bill even
under a 'state action' interpretation.

D.

157

The foregoing analysis of the language, structure, and legislative history of
the 1866 Civil Rights Act shows, I believe, that the Court's thesis that the
Act was meant to extend to purely private action is open to the most serious
doubt, if indeed it does not render that thesis wholly untenable. Another,
albeit less tangible, consideration points in the same direction. Many of the
legislators who took part in the congressional debates inevitably must have
shared the individualistic ethic of their time, which emphasized personal
freedom54 and embodied a distaste for governmental interference which was soon
to culminate in the era of laissez-faire.55 It seems to me that most of these
men would have regarded it as a great intrusion on individual liberty for the
Government to take from a man the power to refuse for personal reasons to
enter into a purely private transaction involving the disposition of property,
albeit those personal reasons might reflect racial bias. It should be
remembered that racial prejudice was not uncommon in 1866, even outside the
South.56 Although Massachusetts had recently enacted the Nation's first law
prohibiting racial discrimination in public accommodations,57 Negroes could
not ride within Philadelphia streetcars58 or attend public schools with white
children in New York City.59 Only five States accorded equal voting rights to
Negroes,60 and it appears that Negroes were allowed to serve on juries only in
Massachusetts.61 Residential segregation was the prevailing pattern almost
everywhere in the North.62 There were no state 'fair housing' laws in 1866,
and it appears that none had ever been proposed.63 In this historical context,
I cannot conceive that a bill thought to prohibit purely private
discrimination not only in the sale or rental of housing but in all property
transactions would not have received a great deal of criticism explicitly
directed to this feature. The fact that the 1866 Act received no criticism of
this kind64 is for me strong additional evidence that it was not regarded as
extending so far.

158

In sum, the most which can be said with assurance about the intended impact of
the 1866 Civil Rights Act upon purely private discrimination is that the Act
probably was envisioned by most members of Congress as prohibiting official,
community-sanctioned discrimination in the South, engaged in pursuant to local
'customs' which in the recent time of slavery probably were embodied in laws
or regulations.65 Acts done under the color of such 'customs' were, of course,
said by the Court in the Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3, 3 S.Ct. 18, to
constitute 'state action' prohibited by the Fourteenth Amendment. See id., at
16, 17, 21, 3 S.Ct. at 24, 25, 28. Adoption of a 'state action' construction
of the Civil Rights Act would therefore have the additional merit of bringing
its interpretation into line with that of the Fourteenth Amendment, which this
Court has consistently held to reach only 'state action.' This seems
especially desirable in light of the wide agreement that a major purpose of
the Fourteenth Amendment, at least in the minds of its congressional
proponents, was to assure that the rights conferred by the then recently
enacted Civil Rights Act could not be taken away by a subsequent Congress.66

II.

159

The foregoing, I think, amply demonstrates that the Court has chosen to
resolve this case by according to a loosely worded statute a meaning which is
open to the strongest challenge in light of the statute's legislative history.
In holding that the Thirteenth Amendment is sufficient constitutional
authority for § 1982 as interpreted, the Court also decides a question of
great importance. Even contemporary supporters of the aims of the 1866 Civil
Rights Act doubted that those goals could constitutionally be achieved under
the Thirteenth Amendment,67 and this Court has twice expressed similar doubts.
See Hodges v. United States, 203 U.S. 1, 16--18, 27 S.Ct. 6, 8--9, 51 L.Ed.
65; Corrigan v. Buckley, 271 U.S. 323, 330, 46 S.Ct. 521. But cf. Civil Rights
Cases, 109 U.S. 3, 22, 3 S.Ct. 18. Thus, it is plain that the course of
decision followed by the Court today entails the resolution of important and
difficult issues.

160

The only apparent way of deciding this case without reaching those issues
would be to hold that the petitioners are entitled to relief on the
alternative ground advanced by them: that the respondents' conduct amounted to
'state action' forbidden by the Fourteenth Amendment. However, that route is
not without formidable obstacles of its own, for the opinion of the Court of
Appeals makes it clear that this case differs substantially from any 'state
action' case previously decided by this Court. See 379 F.2d, at 40--45.

161

The fact that a case is 'hard' does not, of course, relieve a judge of his
duty to decide it. Since, the Court did vote to hear this case, I normally
would consider myself obligated to decide whether the petitioners are entitled
to relief on either of the grounds on which they rely. After mature
reflection, however, I have concluded that this is one of those rare instances
in which an event which occurs after the hearing of argument so diminishes a
case's public significance, when viewed in light of the difficulty of the
questions presented, as to justify this Court in dismissing the writ as
improvidently granted.

162

The occurrence to which I refer is the recent enactment of the Civil Rights
Act of 1968, Pub.L. 90--284, 82 Stat. 73. Title VIII of that Act contains
comprehensive 'fair housing' provisions, which by the terms of § 803 will
become applicable on January 1, 1969, to persons who, like the petitioners,
attempt to buy houses from developers. Under those provisions, such persons
will be entitled to injunctive relief and damages from developers who refuse
to sell to them on account of race or color, unless the parties are able to
resolve their dispute by other means. Thus, the type of relief which the
petitioners seek will be available within seven months' time under the terms
of a presumptively constitutional Act of Congress.68 In these circumstances,
it seems obvious that the case has lost most of its public importance, and I
believe that it would be much the wiser course for this Court to refrain from
deciding it. I think it particularly unfortunate for the Court to persist in
deciding this case on the basis of a highly questionable interpretation of a
sweeping, century-old statute which, as the Court acknowledges, see ante, at
415, contains none of the exemptions which the Congress of our own time found
it necessary to include in a statute regulating relationships so personal in
nature. In effect, this Court, by its construction of § 1982, has extended the
coverage of federal 'fair housing' laws far beyond that which Congress in its
wisdom chose to provide in the Civil Rights Act of 1968. The political process
now having taken hold again in this very field, I am at a loss to understand
why the Court should have deemed it appropriate or, in the circumstances of
this case, necessary to proceed with such precipitate and insecure strides.

163

I am not dissuaded from my view by the circumstance that the 1968 Act was
enacted after oral argument in this case, at a time when the parties and amici
curiae had invested time and money in anticipation of a decision on the
merits, or by the fact that the 1968 Act apparently will not entitle these
petitioners to the relief which they seek.69 For the certiorari jurisdiction
was not conferred upon this Court 'merely to give the defeated party in the *
* * Court of Appeals another hearing,' Magnum Import Co. v. Coty, 262 U.S.
159, 163, 43 S.Ct. 531, 532, 67 L.Ed. 922, or 'for the benefit of the
particular litigants,' Rice v. Sioux City Memorial Park Cemetery, 349 U.S. 70,
74, 75 S.Ct. 614, but to decide issues, 'the settlement of which is of
importance to the public as distinguished from * * * the parties,' Layne &
Bowler Corp. v. Western Well Works, Inc., 261 U.S. 387, 393, 43 S.Ct. 422,
423, 67 L.Ed. 712. I deem it far more important that this Court should avoid,
if possible, the decision of constitutional and unusually difficult statutory
questions than that we fulfill the expectations of every litigant who appears
before us.

164

One prior decision of this Court especially suggests dismissal of the writ as
the proper course in these unusual circumstances. In Rice v. Sioux City
Memorial Park Cemetery, supra, the issue was whether a privately owned
cemetery might defend a suit for breach of a contract to bury on the ground
that the decedent was a Winnebago Indian and the contract restricted burial
privileges to Caucasians. In considering a petition for rehearing following an
initial affirmance by an equally divided Court, there came to the Court's
attention for the first time an Iowa statute which prohibited cemeteries from
discriminating on account of race, but which would not have benefited the Rice
petitioner because of an exception for 'pending litigation.' Mr. Justice
Frankfurter, speaking for a majority of the Court, held that the writ should
be dismissed. He pointed out that the case presented 'evident difficulties,'
349 U.S., at 77, 75 S.Ct., at 618, and noted that '(h)ad the statute been
properly brought to our attention * * *, the case would have assumed such an
isolated significance that it would hardly have been brought here in the first
instance.' Id., at 76--77, 75 S.Ct., at 618. This case certainly presents
difficulties as substantial as those in Rice. Compare what has been said in
this opinion with 349 U.S., at 72--73, 75 S.Ct., at 615--616; see also Bell v.
State of Maryland, 378 U.S. 226, 84 S.Ct. 1814, 12 L.Ed.2d 822. And if the
petition for a writ of certiorari in this case had been filed a few months
after, rather than a few months before, the passage of the 1968 Civil Rights
Act, I venture to say that the case would have been deemed to possess such
'isolated significance,' in comparison with its difficulties, that the
petition would not have been granted.

165

For these reasons, I would dismiss the writ of certiorari as improvidently
granted.

1

To vindicate their rights under 42 U.S.C. § 1982, the petitioners invoked the
jurisdiction of the District Court to award 'damages or * * * equitable or
other relief under any Act of Congress providing for the protection of civil
rights * * *.' 28 U.S.C. § 1343(4). In such cases, federal jurisdiction does
not require that the amount in controversy exceed $10,000. Cf. Douglas v. City
of Jeannette, 319 U.S. 157, 161, 63 S.Ct. 877, 880, 87 L.Ed. 1324; Hague v.
Committee for Industrial Organization, 307 U.S. 496, 507--514, 527--532, 59
S.Ct. 954, 960--963, 969--971, 83 L.Ed. 1423.

2

255 F.Supp. 115.

3

379 F.2d 33.

4

389 U.S. 968, 88 S.Ct. 479, 19 L.Ed.2d 459.

5

Because we have concluded that the discrimination alleged in the petitioners'
complaint violated a federal statute that Congress had the power to enact
under the Thirteenth Amendment, we find it unnecessary to decide whether that
discrimination also violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment.

6

Contrast the Civil Rights Act of 1968, § 804(a).

7

Contrast § 804(b).

8

Contrast § 804(c), (d), (e).

9

Contrast § 805.

10

Contrast § 806\. In noting that 42 U.S.C. § 1982 differs from the Civil Rights
Act of 1968 in not dealing explicitly and exhaustively with such matters (see
also nn. 7 and 9, supra), we intimate no view upon the question whether
ancillary services or facilities of this sort might in some situations
constitute 'property' as that term is employed in § 1982\. Nor do we intimate
any view upon the extent to which discrimination in the provision of such
services might be barred by 42 U.S.C. § 1981, the text of which appears in n.
78, infra.

11

Contrast the Civil Rights Act of 1968, §§ 808--811.

12

Contrast § 813(a).

13

The petitioners in this case sought an order requiring the respondents to sell
them a 'Hyde Park' type of home on Lot No. 7147, or on 'some other lot in
(the) subdivision sufficient to accommodate the home selected * * *.' They
requested that the respondents be enjoined from disposing of Lot No. 7147
while litigation was pending, and they asked for a permanent injunction
against future discrimination by the respondents 'in the sale of homes in the
Paddock Woods subdivision.' The fact that 42 U.S.C. § 1982 is couched in
declaratory terms and provides no explicit method of enforcement does not, of
course, prevent a federal court from fashioning an effective equitable remedy.
See, e.g., Texas & N.O.R. Co. v. Brotherhood of Ry., etc., Clerks, 281 U.S.
548, 568 570, 50 S.Ct. 427, 433, 74 L.Ed. 1034; Deckert v. Independence Corp.,
311 U.S. 282, 288, 61 S.Ct. 29, 233, 85 L.Ed. 189; United States v. Republic
Steel Corp., 362 U.S. 482, 491--492, 80 S.Ct. 884, 889--890, 4 L.Ed.2d 903; J.
I. Case Co. v. Borak, 377 U.S. 426, 432--435, 84 S.Ct. 1555, 1559--1561, 12
L.Ed.2d 423. Cf. Ex parte Young, 209 U.S. 123, 28 S.Ct. 441, 52 L.Ed. 714;
Griffin v. School Board, 377 U.S. 218, 84 S.Ct. 1226, 12 L.Ed.2d 256.

14

Contrast the Civil Rights Act of 1968, § 812(c). The complaint in this case
alleged that the petitioners had 'suffered actual damages in the amount of
$50.00,' but no facts were stated to support or explain that allegation. Upon
receiving the injunctive relief to which they are entitled, see n. 13, supra,
the petitioners will presumably be able to purchase a home from the
respondents at the price prevailing at the time of the wrongful refusal in
1965--substantially less, the petitioners concede, than the current market
value of the property in question. Since it does not appear that the
petitioners will then have suffered any uncompensated injury, we need not
decide here whether, in some circumstances, a party aggrieved by a violation
of § 1982 might properly assert an implied right to compensatory damages. Cf.
Texas & Pacific R. Co. v. Rigsby, 241 U.S. 33, 39--40, 36 S.Ct. 482, 484, 60
L.Ed. 874; Steele v. Louisville & N.R. Co., 323 U.S. 192, 207, 65 S.Ct. 226,
234, 89 L.Ed. 173; Wyandotte Transportation Co. v. United States, 389 U.S.
191, 202, 204, 88 S.Ct. 379, 385--387, 19 L.Ed.2d 407. See generally Bell v.
Hood, 327 U.S. 678, 684, 66 S.Ct. 773, 777, 90 L.Ed. 939. See also 42 U.S.C. §
1988\. In no event, on the facts alleged in the present complaint, would the
petitioners be entitled to punitive damages. See Philadelphia, Wilmington, &
Baltimore R. Co. v. Quigley, 21 How. 202, 213--214, 16 L.Ed. 73. Cf. Barry v.
Edmunds, 116 U.S. 550, 562--565, 6 S.Ct. 501, 507--509, 29 L.Ed. 729; Wills v.
Trans World Airlines, Inc., D.C., 200 F.Supp. 360, 367--368\. We intimate no
view, however, as to what damages might be awarded in a case of this sort
arising in the future under the Civil Rights Act of 1968.

15

See §§ 803(b), 807.

16

Hearings on S. 1358, S. 2114, and S. 2280 before the Subcommittee on Housing
and Urban Affairs of the Senate Committee on Banking an dCurrency, 90th Cong.,
1st Sess., 229. These hearings were a frequent point of reference in the
debates preceding passage of the 1968 Civil Rights Act. See, e.g., 114
Cong.Rec. § 1387 (Feb. 16, 1968), § 1453 (Feb. 20, 1968), § 1641 (Feb. 26,
1968), § 1788 (Feb. 27, 1968).

17

Hearings, supra, n. 16, at 229.

18

Id., at 230. See also id., at 129, 162--163, 251. And see Hearings on S. 1026,
S. 1318, S. 1359, S. 1362, S. 1462, H.R. 2516, and H.R. 10805 before the
Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights of the Senate Committee on the
Judiciary, 90th Cong., 1st Sess., 416.

19

114 Cong.Rec. H 2807 (April 10, 1968). See also id., at H 2808. The Attorney
General of the United States stated during the oral argument in this case that
the Civil Rights Act then pending in Congress 'would provide open housing
rights on a complicated statutory scheme, including administrative, judicial,
and other sanctions for its effectuation * * *.' 'Its potential for
effectiveness,' he added, 'is probably much greater than (§ 1982) because of
the sanctions and the remedies that it provides.'

20

At oral argument, the Attorney General expressed the view that, if Congress
should enact the pending bill, § 1982 would not be affected in any way but
'would stand independently.' That is, of course, correct. The Civil Rights Act
of 1968 does not mention 42 U.S.C. § 1982, and we cannot assume that Congress
intended to effect any change, either substantive or procedural, in the prior
statute. See United States v. Borden Co., 308 U.S. 188, 198--199, 60 S.Ct.
182, 188, 84 L.Ed. 181. See also § 815 of the 1968 Act: 'Nothing in this title
shall be construed to invalidate or limit any law of * * * any * * *
jurisdiction in which this title shall be effective, that grants, guarantees,
or protects the * * * rights * * * granted by this title * * *.'

21

On April 22, 1968, we requested the views of the parties as to what effect, if
any, the enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 had upon this litigation.
The parties and the Attorney General, representing the United States as amicus
curiae, have informed us that the respondents' housing development will not be
covered by the 1968 Act until January 1, 1969; that, even then, the Act will
have no application to cases where, as here, the alleged discrimination
occurred prior to April 11, 1968, the date on which the Act became law; and
that, if the Act were deemed applicable to such cases, the petitioners' claim
under it would nonetheless be barred by the 180-day limitation period of §§
810(b) and 812(a).

Nor did the passage of the 1968 Act after oral argument in this case furnish a
basis for dismissing the writ of certiorari as improvidently granted. Rice v.
Sioux City Memorial Park Cemetery, 349 U.S. 70, 75 S.Ct. 614, 99 L.Ed. 897,
relied upon in dissent, post, at 479, was quite unlike this case, for the
statute that belatedly came to the Court's attention in Rice reached precisely
the same situations that would have been covered by a decision in this Court
sustaining the petitioner's claim on the merits. The coverage of § 1982,
however, is markedly different from that of the Civil Rights Act of 1968.

22

82 U.S.App.D.C. 180, 162 F.2d 233.

23

332 U.S. 789, 68 S.Ct. 100, 92 L.Ed. 371.

24

Compare Harmon v. Tyler, 273 U.S. 668, 47 S.Ct. 471, 71 L.Ed.2d 831,
invalidating a New Orleans ordinance which gave legal force to private
discrimination by forbidding any Negro to establish a home in a white
community, or any white person to establish a home in a Negro community,
"except on the written consent of a majority of the persons of the opposite
race inhabiting such community or portion of the City to be affected." See
Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 U.S. 1, 12, 68 S.Ct. 836, 841, 92 L.Ed. 1161.

25

Two of this Court's early opinions contain dicta to the general effect that §
1982 is limited to state action. State of Virginia v. Rives,

100 U.S. 313, 317--318, 25 L.Ed. 667; Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3, 16--17,
3 S.Ct. 18, 24--25, 27 L.Ed. 835. But all that State of Virginia v. Rives,
supra, actually held was that § 641 of the Revised Statutes of 1874 (derived
from § 3 of the Civil Rights Act of 1866 and currently embodied in 28 U.S.C. §
1443(1)) did not authorize the removal of a state prosecution where the
defendants, without pointing to any statute discriminating against Negroes,
could only assert that a denial of their rights might take place and might go
uncorrected at trial. 100 U.S., at 319--322\. See State of Georgia v. Rachel,
384 U.S. 780, 797--804, 86 S.Ct. 1783, 1792 1796, 16 L.Ed.2d 925. And of
course the Civil Rights Cases, supra, which invalidated §§ 1 and 2 of the
Civil Rights Act of 1875, 18 Stat. 335, did not involve the present statute at
all.

26

379 F.2d 33, 43.

27

Ibid.

28

Act of April 9, 1866, c. 31, § 1, 14 Stat. 27, re-enacted by § 18 of the
Enforcement Act of 1870, Act of May 31, 1870, c. 114, § 18, 16 Stat. 140, 144,
and codified in §§ 1977 and 1978 of the Revised statutes of 1874, now 42
U.S.C. §§ 1981 and 1982. For the text of § 1981, see n. 78, infra.

29

It is, of course, immaterial that § 1 ended with the words 'any law, statute,
ordinance, regulation, or custom, to the contrary notwithstanding.' The phrase
was obviously inserted to qualify the reference to 'like punishment, pains,
and penalties, and to none other,' thus emphasizing the supremacy of the 1866
statute over inconsistent state or local laws, if any. It was deleted,
presumably as surplusage, in § 1978 of the Revised Statutes of 1874.

30

Several weeks before the House began its debate on the Civil Rights Act of
1866, Congress had passed a bill (S. 60) to enlarge the powers of the
Freedmen's Bureau (created by Act of March 3, 1865, c. 90, 13 Stat. 507) by
extending military jurisdiction over certain areas in the South where, 'in
consequence of any State or local law, * * * custom, or prejudice, any of the
civil rights * * * belonging to white persons (including the right * * * to
inherit, purchase, lease, sell, hold, and convey real and personal property *
* are refused or denied to negroes * * * on account of race, color, or any
previous condition of slavery or involuntary servitude * * *.' See Cong.
Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 129, 209. (Emphasis added.) Both Houses had
passed S. 60 (see id., at 421, 688, 748, 775), and although the Senate had
failed to override the President's veto (see id., at 915--916, 943) the bill
was nonetheless significant for its recognition that the 'right to purchase'
was a right that could be 'refused or denied' by 'custom or prejudice' as well
as by 'State or local law.' See also the text accompanying nn. 49 and 59,
infra. Of course an 'abrogation of civil rights made 'in consequence of * * *
custom, or prejudice' might as easily be perpetrated by private individuals or
by unofficial community activity as by state officers armed with statute or
ordinance.' J. tenBroek, Equal Under Law 179 (1965 ed.).

31

When Congressman Bingham of Ohio spoke of the Civil Rights Act, he charged
that it would duplicate the substantive scope of the bill recently vetoed by
the President, see n. 30, supra, and that it would extend the territorial
reach of that bill throughout the United States. Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 1st
Sess., 1292. Although the Civil Rights Act, as th dissent notes, post, at 457,
462, made no explicit reference to 'prejudice,' cf. n. 30, supra, the fact
remains that nobody who rose to answer the Congressman disputed his basic
premise that the Civil Rights Act of 1866 would prohibit every form of racial
discrimination encompassed by the earlier bill the President had vetoed. Even
Senator Trumbull of Illinois, author of the vetoed measure as well as of the
Civil Rights Act, had previously remarked that the latter was designed to
'extend to all parts of the country,' on a permanent basis, the 'equal civil
rights' which were to have been secured in rebel territory by the former, id.,
at 322, to the end that 'all the badges of servitude * * * be abolished.' Id.,
at 323. (Emphasis added.)

32

Section 2 provided:

'That any person who, under color of any law, statute, ordinance, regulation,
or custom, shall subject, or cause to be subjected, any inhabitant of any
State or Territory to the deprivation of any right secured or protected by
this act, or to different punishment, pains, or penalties on account of such
person having at any time been held in a condition of slavery or involuntary
servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been
duly convicted, or by reason of his color or race, than is prescribed for the
punishment of white persons, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, on
conviction, shall be punished by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or
imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both, in the discretion of the court.'
(Emphasis added)

For the evolution of this provision into 18 U.S.C. § 242, see Screws v. United
States, 325 U.S. 91, 98--99, 65 S.Ct. 1031, 1033 1034, 89 L.Ed. 1495; United
States v. Price, 383 U.S. 787, 804, 86 S.Ct. 1152, 1162, 16 L.Ed.2d 267.

33

When Congressman Loan of Missouri asked the Chairman of the House Judiciary
Committee, Mr. Wilson of Iowa, 'why (does) the committee limit the provisions
of the second section to those who act under the color of law,' Cong. Globe,
39th Cong. 1st Sess., 1120, he was obviously inquiring why the second section
did not also punish those who violated the first without acting 'under the
color of law.' Specifically, he asked:

'Why not let them (the penalties of § 2) apply to the whole community where
the acts are committed?' Ibid.

Mr. Wilson's reply was particularly revealing. If, as floor manager of the
bill, he had viewed acts not under color of law as not violative of § 1 at
all, that would of course have been the short answer to the Congressman's
query. Instead, mr. Wilson found it necessary to explain that the Judiciary
Committee did not want to make 'a general criminal code for the States.' Ibid.
Hence only those who discriminated 'in reference to civil rights * * * under
the color of * * * local laws' were made subject to the criminal sanctions of
§ 2\. Ibid.

Congress might have thought it appropriate to confine criminal punishment to
state officials, oath-bound to support the supreme federal law, while allowing
only civil remedies--or perhaps only preventive relief--against private
violators. Or Congress might have thought that States which did not authorize
abridgment of the rights declared in § 1 would themselves punish all who
interfered with those rights without official authority. See, e.g., Cong.
Globe, 39th Cong. 1st Sess., 1758, 1785. Cf. Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3,
19, 24--25, 3 S.Ct. 18, 27, 30--31, 27 L.Ed. 835.

Whatever the reason, it was repeatedly stressed that the only violations
'reached and punished' by the bill, see Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., at
1294 (emphasis added), would be those 'done under color of State authority.'
Ibid. It is observed in dissent, post, at 458, that Senator Trumbull told
Senator Cowan that § 2 was directed not at 'State officers especially, but
(at) everybody who violates the law.' That remark, however, was nothing more
than a reply to Senator Cowan's charge that § 2 was 'exceedingly
objectionable' in singling out state judicial officers for punishment for the
first time 'in the history of civilized legislation.' Id., at 500.

34

See, e.g., Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., at 39, 474, 516--517, 602--603,
1123--1125, 1151--1153, 1160. For the substance of the codes and their
operation, see H.R.Exec.Dec. No. 118, 39th Cong., 1st Sess.; S.Exec.Dec. No.
6, 39th Cong., 2d Sess.; 1 W. Fleming, Documentary History of Reconstruction
273--312 (1906); E. McPherson, The Political History of the United States of
America During the Period of Reconstruction 29--44 (1871); 2 S. Morison and H.
Commager, The Growth of the American Republic 17--18 (1950 ed.); K. Stampp,
The Era of Reconstruction 79--81 (1965).

35

See n. 31, supra. It is true, as the dissent emphasizes, post, at 460, that
Senator Trumbull remarked at one point that the Act 'could have no operation
in Massachusetts, New York, Illinois, or most of the States of the Union,'
whose laws did not themselves discriminate against Negroes. Cong. Globe, 39th
Cong., 1st Sess., 1761. But the Senator was simply observing that the Act
would 'in no manner (interfere) with the * * * regulations of any State which
protects all alike in their rights of person and property.' Ibid. See also
id., at 476, 505, 600. That is, the Act would have no effect upon
nondiscriminatory legislation. Senator Trumbull obviously could not have meant
that the law would apply to racial discrimination in some States but not in
others, for the bill on its face applied upon its enactment 'in every State
and Territory in the United States,' and no one disagreed when Congressman
Bingham complained that, unlike Congress' recently vetoed attempt to expand
the Freedmen's Bureau, see n. 30, supra, the Civil Rights Act would operate
'in every State of the Union.' Id., at 1292. Nor, contrary to a suggestion
made in dissent, post, at p. 460, was the Congressman speaking only of the
Act's potential operation in any State that might enact a racially
discriminatory law in the future. The Civil Rights Act, Congressman Bingham
insisted, would 'be enforced in every State * * * (at) the present * * *
time.' Ibid. (Emphasis added.)

36

J. tenBroek, supra, n. 30, at 181. See also W. Brock, An American Crisis 124
(1963); J. McPherson, The Struggle For Equality 332 (1964); K. Stampp, supra,
n. 34, at 75, 131--132.

37

Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 95, 1833.

38

Id., at 1160.

39

Id., at 339--340, 1160, 1835. It is true, as the dissent notes, post, at p.
462, that some of the references to private assaults occurred during debate on
the Freedmen's Bureau bill, n. 30, supra, but the congressional discussion
proceeded upon the understanding that all discriminatory conduct reached by
the Freedmen's Bureau bill would be reached as well by the Civil Rights Act.
See, e.g., n. 31, supra.

40

Id., at 1835. It is clear that these instances of private mistreatment, see
also text accompanying n. 41, infra, were understood as illustrative of the
evils that the Civil Rights Act of 1866 would correct. Congressman Eldridge of
Wisconsin, for example, said this:

'Gentlemen refer us to individual cases of wrong perpetrated upon the freedmen
of the South as an argument why we should extend the Federal authority into
the different States to control the action of the citizens thereof. But, I
ask, has not the South submitted to the altered state of things there, to the
late amendment of the Constitution, to the loss of their slave property, with
a cheerfulness and grace that we did not expect? * * * I deprecate all these
measures because of the implication they carry upon their face that the people
who have heretofore owned slaves intend to do them wrong. I do not believe it.
* * * The cases of ill-treatment are exceptional cases.' Id., at 1156.

So it was that 'opponents denied or minimized the facts asserted' but 'did not
contend that the (Civil Rights Act) would not reach such facts if they did
exist.' J. tenBroek, supra, n. 30, at 181.

41

Report of C. Schurz, C. Schurz, S.Exec.Doc. No. 2, 39th Cong. 1st Sess., 2, 17
--25\. See W. Brock, supra, n. 36, at 40--42; K. Stampp, supra, n. 34, at 73--
75.

42

Report of C. Schurz, supra, at 23--24.

43

Id., at 25.

44

Id., at 18.

45

Id., at 35.

46

J. tenBroek, supra, n. 30, at 177. One of the proposals, sponsored by Senator
Wilson of Massachusetts, would have declared void all 'laws, statutes, acts,
ordinances, rules, and regulations' establishing or maintaining in former
rebel States 'any inequality of civil rights and immunities' on account of
'color, race, or * * * a previous condition * * * of slavery.' Cong. Globe,
39th Cong., 1st Sess., 39. The other two proposals, sponsored by Senator
Sumner of Massachusetts, would have struck down in the former Confederate
State 'all laws * * * destablishing any oligarchical privileges and any
disinction of rights on account of color or race' and would have required that
all persons there be 'recognized as equal before the law.' Id., at 91.

47

See n. 46, supra.

48

Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 43. (Emphasis added.) The dissent seeks to
neutralize the impact of this quotation by noting that, prior to making the
above statement the Senator had argued that the second clause of the
Thirteenth Amendment was inserted 'for the purpose, and none other, of
preventing State Legislatures from enslaving, under any pretense, those whom
the first clause declared should be free.' See post, at 455, 462--463\. In
fact, Senator Trumbull was simply replying at that point to the contention of
Senator Saulsbury of Delaware that the second clause of the Thirteenth
Amendment was never intended to authorize federal legislation interfering with
subjects other than slavery itself. See id., at 42. Senator Trumbull responded
that the clause was intended to authorize precisely such legislation. That,
'and none other,' he said for emphasis, was its avowed purpose. But Senator
Trumbull did not imply that the force of § 2 of the Thirteenth Amendment would
be spent once Congress had nullified discriminatory state laws. On the
contrary, he emphasized the fact that it was 'for Congress to determine, and
nobody else,' what sort of legislation might be 'appropriate' to make the
Thirteenth Amendment effective. Id., at 43. Cf. Part V of this opinion, infra.

49

Id., at 77. (Emphasis added.)

50

Id., at 129.

51

Id., at 474.

52

Ibid. See the dissenting opinion, post, at p. 458.

53

Id., at 475.

54

Id., at 599. (Emphasis added.) Senator Trumbull later observed that his bill
would add nothing to federal authority if the States would fully 'perform
their constitutional obligations.' Id., at 600. See also Senator Trumbull's
remarks, id., at 1758; the remarks of Senator Lane of Indiana, id., at 602--
603; and the remarks of Congressman Wilson of Iowa, id., at 1117--1118\. But
it would be a serious mistake to infer from such statements any notion (see
the dissenting opinion, post, at p. 460) that, so long as the States refrained
from actively discriminating against Negroes, their 'obligations' in this
area, as Senator Trumbull and others understood them, would have been
fulfilled. For the Senator's concern, it will be recalled (see text
accompanying n. 49, supra), was that Negroes might be 'oppressed and in fact
deprived of their freedom' not only by hostile laws but also by 'prevailing
public sentiment,' and he viewed his bill as necessary 'unless by local
legislation they (the States) provide for the real freedom of their former
slaves.' Id., at 77. See also id., at 43. And see the remarks of Congressman
Lawrence of Ohio:

'Now, there are two ways in which a State may undertake to deprive citizens of
these absolute, inherent, and inalienable rights: either by prohibitory laws,
or by a failure to protect any one of them.' Id., at 1833.

55

See, e.g., the remarks of Senator Howard of Michigan. Id., at 504.

56

See, e.g., the remarks of Senator Cowan of Pennsylvania, id., at 500, and the
remarks of Senator Hendricks of Indiana. Id., at 601.

57

Senator Saulsbury of Delaware. Id., at 478.

58

Senator Van Winkle of West Virginia. Id., at 498.

59

Senator Lane of Indiana. Id., at 603.

60

Id., at 606--607.

61

See, e.g., id., at 1118--1119, 1123--1125, 1151--1153, 1160. See generally the
discussion in the dissenting opinion, post, at 464--467.

62

Id., at 1151. (Emphasis added.)

63

Id., at 1124.

64

Ibid. (Emphasis added.) The clear import of these remarks is in no way
diminished by the heated debate, see id., at 1290 1294, portions of which are
quoted in the dissenting opinion, post, at 467--468, between Representative
Bingham, opposing the bill, and Representative Shellabarger, supporting it,
over the question of what kinds of state laws might be invalidated by § 1, a
question not involved in this case.

65

Id., at 1367. On March 15, the Senate concurred in the several technical
amendments that had been made by the House. Id., at 1413--1416.

66

Id., at 1679--1681.

67

Senator Cowan of Pennsylvania. Id., at 1781.

68

Senator Davis of Kentucky. Id., Appendix, at 183. Such expansive views of the
Act's reach found frequent and unchallenged expression in the Nation's press.
See, e.g., Daily National Intelligencer (Washington, D.C.), March 24, 1866, p.
2, col. 1; New York Herald, March 29, 1866, p. 4, col. 3; Cincinnati
Commercial, March 30, 1866, p. 4, col. 2; Evening Post (New York), April 7,
1866, p. 2, col. 1; Indianapolis Daily Herald, April 17, 1866, p. 2, col. 1.

69

Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 1809, 1861.

70

'Never before had Congress over-ridden a President on a major political issue,
and there was special gratification in feeling that this had not been done to
carry some matter of material interest, such as a tariff, but in the cause of
disinterested justice.' W. Brock, supra, n. 36, at 115.

71

Section 18 of the Enforcement Act of 1870, Act of May 31, 1870 c. 114, § 18,
16 Stat. 144:

'And be it further enacted, That the act to protect all persons in the United
States in their civil rights, and furnish the means of their vindication,
passed April nine, eighteen hundred and sixty-six, is hereby re-enacted * *
*.'

72

See United States v. Mosley, 238 U.S. 383, 387--388, 35 S.Ct. 904, 905--906,
59 L.Ed. 1355; United States v. Price, 383 U.S. 787, 804--805, 86 S.Ct. 1152,
1162, 16 L.Ed.2d 267, 2 W. Flemming, Documentary History of Reconstruction 285
--288 (1907); K. Stampp, supra, n. 34, at 145, 171, 185, 198--204; G.
Stephenson, Race Distinctions in American Law 116 (1910).

73

The Court of Appeals in this case seems to have derived such an assumption
from language in State of Virginia v. Rives, 100 U.S. 313, 317--318, 25 L.Ed.
667, and Hurd v. Hodge, 334 U.S. 24, 31, 68 S.Ct. 847, 851. See 379 F.2d 33,
39--40, 43. Both of those opinions simply asserted that, at least after its
re-enactment in 1870, the Civil Rights Act of 1866 was directed only at
governmental action. Neither opinion explained why that was thought to be so,
and in each case the statement was merely dictum. See n. 25, supra.

74

So it was, for example, that this Court unanimously upheld the power of
Congress under the Thirteenth Amendment to make it a crime for one individual
to compel another to work in order to discharge a debt. Clyatt v. United
States, 197 U.S. 207, 25 S.Ct. 429, 49 L.Ed. 726.

75

See, e.g., Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 113, 318, 476, 499, 507, 576,
600--601.

76

See, e.g., Cong. Globe, 38th Cong., 1st Sess., 1366, 2616, 2940-2941, 2962,
2986; Cong., Globe, 38th Cong., 2d Sess., 178--180, 180, 182, 192, 195, 239,
241--242, 480--481, 529.

77

Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 322. See also the remarks of Senator
Howard of Michigan. Id., at 503.

78

The Court did conclude in the Civil Rights Cases that 'the act of * * * the
owner of the inn, the public conveyance or place of amusement, refusing * * *
accommodation' cannot be 'justly regarded as imposing any badge of slavery or
servitude upon the applicant.' 109 U.S., at 24, 3 S.Ct., at 31. 'It would be
running the slavery argument into the ground,' the Court thought, 'to make it
apply to every act of discrimination which a person may see fit to make as to
the guests he will entertain, or as to the people he will take into his coach
or cab or car, or admit to his concert or theatre, or deal with in other
matters of intercourse or business.' Id., at 24--25, 3 S.Ct., at 31. Mr.
Justice Harlan, dissented, expressing the view that 'such discrimination
practised by corporations and individuals in the exercise of their public or
quasi-public functions is a badge of servitude the imposition of which
congress may prevent under its power, by appropriate legislation, to enforce
the thirteenth amendment.' Id., at 43, 3 S.Ct., at 44.

Whatever the present validity of the position taken by the majority on that
issue--a question rendered largely academic by Title II of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 243 (see Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States, 379
U.S. 241, 85 S.Ct. 348, 13 L.Ed.2d 258; Katzenbach v. McClung, 379 U.S. 294,
85 S.Ct. 377, 13 L.Ed.2d 290)--we note that the entire Court agreed upon at
least one proposition: The Thirteenth Amendment authorizes Congress not only
to outlaw all forms of slavery and involuntary servitude but also to eradicate
the last vestiges and incidents of a society half slave and half free, by
securing to all citizens, of every race and color, 'the same right to make and
enforce contracts, to sue, be parties, give evidence, and to inherit,
purchase, lease, sell and convey property, as is enjoyed by white citizens.'
109 U.S., at 22, 3 S.Ct., at 39. Cf. id., at 35, 3 S.Ct. at 39 (dissenting
opinion).

In Hodges v. United States, 203 U.S. 1, 27 S.Ct. 6, 51 L.Ed. 65, a group of
white men had terrorized several Negroes to prevent them from working in a

sawmill. The terrorizers were convicted under 18 U.S.C. § 241 (then Revised
Statutes § 5508) of conspiring to prevent the Negroes from exercising the
right to contract for employment, a right secured by 42 U.S.C. § 1981 (then
Revised Statutes § 1977, derived from § 1 of the Civil Rights Act of 1866, see
n. 28, supra). Section 1981 provides, in terms that closely parallel those of
§ 1982 (then Revised Statutes § 1978), that all persons in the United States
'shall have the same right * * * to make and enforce contracts, to sue, be
parties, give evidence, and to the full and equal benefit of all laws and
proceedings for the security of persons and property as is enjoyed by white
citizens * * *.' (Emphasis added.)

This Court reversed the conviction. The majority recognized that 'one of the
disabilities of slavery, one of the indicia of its existence, was a lack of
power to make or perform contracts.' 203 U.S., at 17, 27 S.Ct. at 9. And there
was no doubt that the defendants had deprived their Negro victims, on racial
grounds, of the opportunity to dispose of their labor by contract. Yet the
majority said that 'no mere personal assault or trespass or appropriation
operates to reduce the individual to a condition of slavery,' id., at 18, 27
S.Ct., at 9, and asserted that only conduct which actually enslaves someone
can be subjected to punishment under legislation enacted to enforce the
Thirteenth Amendment. Contra, United States v. Cruikshank, 25 Fed.Cas. No.
14,897, pp. 707, 712 (dictum of Mr. Justice Bradley, on circuit), aff'd, 92
U.S. 542, 23 L.Ed. 588; United States v. Morris, D.C., 125 F. 322, 324, 330--
331\. Mr. Justice Harlan, joined by Mr. Justice Day, dissented. In their view,
the interpretation the majority placed upon the Thirteenth Amendment was
'entirely too narrow and * * * hostile to the freedom established by the
Supreme Law of the land.' 203 U.S. at 37, 27 S.Ct., at 17. That interpretation
went far, they thought, 'towards neutralizing many declarations made as to the
object of the recent Amendments of the Constitution, a common purpose of
which, this court has said, was to secure to a people theretofore in
servitude, the free enjoyment, without discrimination merely on account of
their race, of the essential rights that appertain to American citizenship and
to freedom.' Ibid.

The conclusion of the majority in Hodges rested upon a concept of
congressional power under the Thirteenth Amendment irrecon

cilable with the position taken by every member of this Court in the Civil
Rights Cases and incompatible with the history and purpose of the Amendment
itself. Insofar as Hodges is inconsistent with our holding today, it is hereby
overruled.

79

See text accompanying n. 48, supra.

80

Ibid.

81

See text accompanying n. 62, supra.

82

Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 1118.

83

Ibid.

1

The cases are collected in five volumes in H. Catterall, Judicial Cases
Concerning American Slavery and the Negro (1926 1937). And see 1 T. Cobb, An
Inquiry into the Law of Negro Slavery, c. XIV (1858); G. Ostrander, The Rights
of Man in America 1606--1861, p. 252 (1960); G. Stroud, Sketch of the Laws
Relating to Slavery 45--50 (1827); J. Wheeler, Law of Slavery 190--191 (1837).

2

Except from Frederick Douglass, The Color Line, The North American Review,
June 1881, 4 The Life and Writings of Frederick Douglass 343--344 (1955).

3

See Kamper v. Department of State of New York, 22 N.Y.2d 690, 291 N.Y.S.2d
804, 238 N.E.2d 914.

4

See, e.g., O'Hanlon, The Case Against the Unions, Fortune, Jan. 1968, at 170.

5

The contrivances which some States have concocted to thwart the command of our
decision in Brown v. Board of Education are by now legendary. See, e.g.,
Monroe v. Board of Commissioners, 391 U.S. 450, 88 S.Ct. 1700, 20 L.Ed.2d 733
(Tennessee 'free-transfer' plan); Green v. County School Board, 391 U.S. 430,
88 S.Ct. 1689, 20 L.Ed.2d 716 (Virginia school board 'freedom-of-choice'
plan); Raney v. Board of Education, 391 U.S. 443, 88 S.Ct. 1967, 20 L.Ed. 727
(Arkansas 'freedom-of-choice' plan); Bradley v. School Board, 382 U.S. 103, 86
S.Ct. 224, 15 L.Ed.2d 187 (allocation of faculty allegedly on a racial basis);
Griffin v. County School Board, 377 U.S. 218, 84 S.Ct. 1226, 12 L.Ed.2d 256
(closing of public schools in Price Edward County, Virginia, with tuition
grants and tax concessions used to assist white children attending private
segregated schools); Goss v. Board of Education, 373 U.S. 683, 83 S.Ct. 1405,
10 L.Ed.2d 632 (Tennessee rezoning of school districts, with a transfer plan
permitting transfer by students on the basis of race); United States v.
Jefferson County Board of Education, 372 F.2d 836, aff'd en banc, 380 F.2d 385
(C.A.5th Cir. 1967) ('freedom-of-choice' plans in States within the
jurisdiction of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit);
Northcross v. Board of Education, 302 F.2d 818 (C.A.6th Cir. 1962) (Tennessee
pupil-assignment law); Orleans Parish School Board v. Bush, 242 F.2d 156
(C.A.5th Cir. 1957) (Louisiana pupil-assignment law); Hall v. St. Helena
Parish School Board, 197 F.Supp. 649 (D.C.E.D.La.1961), aff'd, 368 U.S. 515,
82 S.Ct. 529, 7 L.Ed.2d 521 (Louisiana law permitting closing of public
schools, with extensive state aid going to private segregated schools); Holmes
v. Danner, 191 F.Supp. 394 (D.C.M.D.Ga.1961) (Georgia statute cutting off
state funds of Negroes admitted to state university); Aaron v. McKinley, 173
F.Supp. 944 (D.C.E.D.Ark.1959), aff'd sub nom. Faubus v. Aaron, 361 U.S. 197,
80 S.Ct. 291, 4 L.Ed.2d 237 (Arkansas statute cutting off state funds to
integrated school districts); James v. Almond, 170 F.Supp. 331
(D.C.E.D.Va.1959), (closing of all integrated public schools). See also Rogers
v. Paul, 382 U.S. 198, 86 S.Ct. 358, 15 L.Ed.2d 265; Calhoun v. Latimer, 377
U.S. 263, 84 S.Ct. 1235, 12 L.Ed.2d 288; Cooper v. Aaron, 358 U.S. 1, 78 S.Ct.
1401, 3 L.Ed.2d 5.

6

My Brother HARLAN'S listing of some of the 'customs' prevailing in the North
at the time § 1982 was first enacted shows the extent of organized white
discrimination against newly freed blacks. As he states, '(r)esidential
segregation was the prevailing pattern almost everywhere in the North.' Post,
at 474-475. Certainly, then, it was 'customary.' To suggest, however, that
there might be room for argument in this case (post, at 475, n. 65) that the
discrimination against petitioners was not in some measure a part and product
of this longstanding and widespread customary pattern is to pervert the
problem by allowing the legal mind to draw lines and make distinctions that
have no place in the jurisprudence of a nation striving to rejoin the human
race.

1

This 'state action' argument emphasizes the respondents' role as housing
developers exercising continuing authority over a suburban housing complex
with about 1,000 inhabitants.

2

The Civil Rights Act of 1968, Pub.L. 90--284, 82 Stat. 73.

3

Id., §§ 801--819.

4

See ante, at 417, n. 21.

5

See also Virginia v. Rives, 100 U.S. 313, 317--318, 25 L.Ed. 667.

6

Section 1978 of the Revised Statutes.

7

See also Buchanan v. Warley, 245 U.S. 60, 78--79, 38 S.Ct. 16, 19, 62 L.Ed.2d
149.

8

It seems to me that this passage is not dictum, as the Court terms it, ante,
at 419, and n. 25, but a holding. For if the Court had held the covenants in
question invalid as between the parties, then it would not have had to rely
upon a finding of 'state action.'

9

Despite the Court's view that this reading flies in the face of the 'plain and
unambiguous terms' of the statute, see ante, at 420, it is not without
precedent. In the Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3, 3 S.Ct. 18, the Court said
of identical language in the predecessor statute to § 1982:

'(C)ivil rights, such as are guaranteed by the constitution against state
aggression, cannot be impaired by the wrongful acts of individuals,
unsupported by state authority * * *. The wrongful act of an individual,
unsupported by any such authority, is simply a private wrong, or a crime of
that individual; an invasion of the rights of the injured party, it is true *
* *; but if not sanctioned insome way by the state, or not done under State
authority, his rights remain in full force, and may presumably be vindicated
by resort to the laws of the State for redress. An individual cannot deprive a
man of his right * * * to hold property, to buy and sell * * *; he may, by
force or fraud, interfere with the enjoyment of the right in a particular
case; * * * but, unless protected in these wrongful acts by some shield of
state law or state authority, he cannot destroy or injure the right * * *.'
109 U.S., at 17, 3 S.Ct., at 25.

10

The Court does not claim that the deletion from § 1 of the statute, in 1874,
of the words 'any law, statute, ordinance, regulation, or custom, to the
contrary notwithstanding' was intended to have any substantive effect. See
ante, at 422, n. 29.

11

See Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 39--42.

12

Id., at 43.

13

See ibid.

14

See Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 129.

15

Freedmen's bill, § 7\. The text of the bill may be found in E. McPherson, The
Political History of the United States of America During the Period of
Reconstruction 72 (1871). The Freedmen's bill was passed by both the Senate
and the House, but the Senate failed to override the President's veto. See
Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 421, 688, 742, 748, 775, 915 916, 943.

16

Section 7 of the Freedmen's bill would have permitted the President to extend
'military protection and jurisdiction' over all cases in which the specified
rights were denied, while § 3 of the Civil Rights Act merely gave the federal
courts concurrent jurisdiction over such actions. Section 8 of the Freedmen's
bill would have allowed agents of the Freedmen's Bureau to try and convict
those who violated the bill's criminal provisions, while § 3 of the Civil
Rights Act only gave the federal courts exclusive jurisdiction over such
actions.

17

Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 474. (Emphasis added.)

18

Id., at 475. (Emphasis added.)

19

Id., at 500. (Emphasis added.) The Civil Rights Cases, 109 U.S. 3, 3 S.Ct. 18,
suggest how Senator Trumbull might have expected § 2 to affect persons other
than 'officers' in spite of its 'under color' language, for it was there said
in dictum that:

'The civil rights bill * * * is analogous * * * to (a law) under the original
Constitution, declaring that the validity of contracts should not be impaired,
and that if any person bound by a contract should refuse to comply with it,
under color or pretence that it had been rendered void or invalid by a state
law, he should be liable to an action upon it in the courts of the United
States, with the addition of a penalty for setting up such an unjust and
unconstitutional defence.' 109 U.S., at 17, 3 S.Ct., at 25. (Emphasis added.)

20

Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 476. (Emphasis added.)

21

Id., at 600. (Emphasis added.)

22

Id., at 1758.

23

Id., at 1761. (Emphasis added.)

24

Moreover, a few Northern States apparently did have laws which denied to
Negroes rights enumerated in the Act. See G. Stephenson, Race Distinctions in
American Law 36--39 (1910); L.Litwack, North of Slavery: The Negro in the Free
States, 1790 1860, at 93--94 (1961).

25

Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 1759.

26

Id., at 1760. (Emphasis added.)

27

See Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 339--340.

28

The Court also gives prominence, see ante, at 428-429, to a report by General
Carl Schurz which described private as well as official discrimination against
freedmen in the South. However, it is apparent that the Senate regarded the
report merely as background, and it figured relatively little in the debates.
Moreover, to the extent that the described discrimination was the product of
'custom,' it would have been prohibited by the bill.

29

See infra, at 473--475.

30

Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 603.

31

Ibid.

32

See Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 1781.

33

Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., Appendix, 183.

34

Ibid.

35

Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 1118. (Emphasis added.)

36

Id., at 1119. (Emphasis added.)

37

Id., at 1151. (Emphasis added.)

38

Id., at 1152. (Emphasis added.)

39

Id., at 1153. (Emphasis added.)

40

Id., at 1291. (Emphasis added.)

41

Id., at 1293--1294\. It is quite clear that Representative Shellabarger was
speaking of the bill's first section, for he did not mention the second
section until later in his speech, and then only briefly and in terms which
indicated that he thought it co-extensive with the first ('I cannot remark on
the second section further than to say that it is the ordinary case of
providing punishment for violating a law of Congress.'). See id., at 1294.

42

Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 1832--1833\. (Emphasis added.)

43

Id., at 1120.

44

It is worthy of note, however, that if Representative Wilson believed that § 2
of the bill would apply only to state officers, and not to other members of
the community, he apparently differed from the bill's author. See the remarks
of Senator Trumbull quoted, supra, at 458.

45

The Court's reliance, see ante, at 425, n. 33, on the statement of
Representative Shellabarger that 'the violations of citizens' rights, which
are reached and punished by this bill, are those which are * * * done under
color of state authority * * *,' Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 1294,
seems very misplaced when the statement is taken in context. A fuller version
of Representative Shellabarger's remarks will be found, supra, at 467 468.

46

See Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 1160.

47

See ibid.

48

See Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 1835.

49

Ibid. (Emphasis added.)

50

Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 1156.

51

See id., at 1115--1124, 1151--1155.

52

The emphasis given by the Court to the statement of Representative Thayer
which is quoted, ante, at 433-434, surely evaporates when the statement is
viewed in conjunction with Representative Thayer's immediately following
remarks, quoted, supra, at 466--467.

53

Id., at 1124. (Emphasis added.) Earlier in the same speech, Representative
Cook had described actual vagrancy laws which had recently been passed by
reconstructed Southern legislatures. See id., at 1123--1124.

54

An eminent American historian has said that the events of the last third of
the 19th century took place 'in a framework of pioneer individualistic mores *
* *.' S. Morison, The Oxford History of the American People 788 (1965). See
also 3 V. Parrington, Main Currents in American Thought 7--22 (1930).

55

It has been suggested that the effort of the congressional radicals to enact a
program of land reform in favor of the freedmen during Reconstruction failed
in part because it smacked too much of 'paternalism' and interference with
property rights. See K. Stampp, The Era of Reconstruction 126--131 (1965).

56

See generally M. Konvitz & T. Leskes, A Century of Civil Rights (1961); L.
Litwack, North of Slavery: The Negro in the Free States, 1790--1860 (1961); K.
Stampp, supra, at 12--17; G. Stephenson, Race Distinctions in American Law
(1910); Maslow & Robison, Civil Rights Legislation and the Fight for Equality,
1862 1952, 20 U.Chi.L.Rev. 363 (1953).

57

See M. Kronvitz & T. Leskes, supra, at 155--156; 1864--1865 Mass.Acts and
Resolves 650.

58

Negroes were permitted to ride only on the front platforms of the cars. See L.
Litwack, supra, at 112.

59

Negro students in New York City were compelled to attend separate schools,
called African schools, under authority of an 1864 New York State statute
which empowered school officials to establish separate, equal schools for
Negro children. See L. Litwack, supra, at 121, 133--134, 136, 151; G.
Stephenson, supra, at 185; 1864 N.Y.Laws 1281. In 1883, the New York Court of
Appeals held that students in Brooklyn might constitutionally be segregated
pursuant to the statute. See People ex rel. King v. Gallagher, 93 N.Y. 438. In
1900, the statute was finally repealed and segregation legally forbidden. See
1900 N.Y.Laws, Vol. II, at 1173.

60

See L. Litwack, supra, at 91--92\. The States were Massachusetts, Rhode
Island, Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont. See id., at 91.

61

See L. Litwack, supra, at 94.

62

See id., at 168--170.

63

It has been noted that:

'Residential housing, despite its importance * * *, appears to be the last of
the major areas of discrimination that the states have been willing to
attack.' M. Konvitz & T. Leskes, supra, at 236.

And as recently as 1953, it could be said:

'Bills have been introduced in state legislatures to forbid racial or
religious discrimination in 'multiple dwellings' (those housing three or more
families), * * * but these proposals have not been considered seriously by any
legislative body.' Maslow & Robison, supra, at 408. (Footnotes omitted.)

64

In contrast, the bill was repeatedly and vehemently attacked, in the face of
emphatic denials by its sponsors, on the ground that it allegedly would
invalidate two types of state laws: those denying Negroes equal voting rights
and those prohibiting intermarriage. See e.g., Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st
Sess., 598, 600, 604, 606, 1121, 1157, 1263.

65

The petitioners do not argue, and the Court does not suggest that the
discrimination complained of in this case was the product of such a 'custom.'

66

See, e.g., H. Flack, The Adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment 94 (1908); J.
James, The Framing of the Fourteenth Amendment 126--128, 179 (1956); 2 S.
Morison & H. Commager, The Growth of the American Republic 39 (4th ed. 1950);
K. Stampp, supra, at 136; J. tenBroek, Equal Under Law 224 (1965); L. Warsoff,
Equality and the Law 126 (1938).

67

See, e.g., Cong.Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 504--505 (Senator Johnson); id.,
at 1291--1293 (Representative Bingham).

68

Of course, the question of the constitutionality of the 'fair housing'
provisions of the 1968 Civil Rights Act is not before us, and I intend no
implication about how I would decide that issue.

69

See, ante, at 417, n. 21.

