326 U.S. 501

66 S.Ct. 276

90 L.Ed. 265

MARSH  
v.  
STATE OF ALABAMA.

No. 114.

Argued and Submitted Dec. 7, 1945.

Decided Jan. 7, 1946.

On Appeal from the Court of Appeals of the State of Alabama.

Mr. Hayden C. Covington, of Brooklyn, N.Y., for appellants.

Mr. William N. McQueen, of Montgomery, Ala., for appellee.

Mr. Justice BLACK delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

In this case we are asked to decide whether a State, consistently with the
First and Fourteenth Amendments, can impose criminal punishment on a person
who undertakes to distribute religious literature on the premises of a
company-owned town contrary to the wishes of the town's management. The town,
a suburb of Mobile, Alabama, known as Chickasaw, is owned by the Gulf
Shipbuilding Corporation. Except for that it has all the characteristics of
any other American town. The property consists of residential buildings,
streets, a system of sewers, a sewage disposal plant and a 'business block' on
which business places are situated. A deputy of the Mobile County Sheriff,
paid by the company, serves as the town's policeman. Merchants and service
establishments have rented the stores and business places on the business
block and the United States uses one of the places as a post office from which
six carriers deliver mail to the people of Chickasaw and the adjacent area.
The town and the surrounding neighborhood, which can not be distinguished from
the Gulf property by anyone not familiar with the property lines, are thickly
settled, and according to all indications the residents use the business block
as their regular shopping center. To do so, they now, as they have for many
years, make use of a company-owned paved street and sidewalk located alongside
the store fronts in order to enter and leave the stores and the post office.
Intersecting company-owned roads at each end of the business block lead into a
four-lane public highway which runs parallel to the business block at a
distance of thirty feet. There is nothing to stop highway traffic from coming
onto the business block and upon arrival a traveler may make free use of the
facilities available there. In short the town and its shopping district are
accessible to and freely used by the public in general and there is nothing to
distinguish them from any other town and shopping center except the fact that
the title to the property belongs to a private corporation.

2

Appellant, a Jehovah's Witness, came onto the sidewalk we have just described,
stood near the post-office and undertook to distribute religious literature.
In the stores the corporation had posted a notice which read as follows: 'This
Is Private Property, and Without Written Permission, No Street, or House
Vendor, Agent or Solicitation of Any Kind Will Be Permitted.' Appellant was
warned that she could not distribute the literature without a permit and told
that no permit would be issued to her. She protested that the company rule
could not be constitutionally applied so as to prohibit her from distributing
religious writings. When she was asked to leave the sidewalk and Chickasaw she
declined. The deputy sheriff arrested her and she was charged in the state
court with violating Title 14, Section 426 of the 1940 Alabama Code which
makes it a crime to enter or remain on the premises of another after having
been warned not to do so. Appellant contended that to construe the state
statute as applicable to her activities would abridge her right to freedom of
press and religion contrary to the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the
Constitution. This contention was rejected and she was convicted. The Alabama
Court of Appeals affirmed the conviction, holding that the statute as applied
was constitutional because the title to the sidewalk was in the corporation
and because the public use of the sidewalk had not been such as to give rise
to a presumption under Alabama law of its irrevocable dedication to the
public. 21 So.2d 558. The State Supreme Court denied certiorari, 2 6 Ala. 539,
21 So.2d 564, and the case is here on appeal under Section 237(a) of the
Judicial Code, 28 U.S.C. ยง 344(a), 28 U.S.C.A. ยง 344(a).

3

Had the title to Chickasaw belonged not to a private but to a municipal
corporation and had appellant been arrested for violating a municipal
ordinance rather than a ruling by those appointed by the corporation to manage
a company-town it would have been clear that appellant's conviction must be
reversed. Under our decision in Lovell v. Griffin, 303 U.S. 444, 58 S.Ct. 666,
82 L.Ed. 949, and others which have followed that case,1 neither a state nor a
municipality can completely bar the distribution of literature containing
religious or political ideas on its streets, sidewalks and public places or
make the right to distribute dependent on a flat license tax or permit to be
issued by an official who could deny it at will. We have also held that an
ordinance completely prohibiting the dissemination of ideas on the city
streets can not be justified on the ground that the municipality holds legal
title to them. Jamison v. Texas, 318 U.S. 413, 63 S.Ct. 669, 87 L.Ed. 869. And
we have recognized that the preservation of a free society is so far dependent
upon the right of each individual citizen to receive such literature as he
himself might desire that a municipality could not without jeopardizing that
vital individual freedom, prohibit door to door distribution of literature.
Martin v. Struthers, 319 U.S. 141, 146, 147, 63 S.Ct. 862, 865, 87 L.Ed. 1313.
From these decisions it is clear that had the people of Chickasaw owned all
the homes, and all the stores, and all the streets, and all the sidewalks, all
those owners together could not have set up a municipal government with
sufficient power to pass an ordinance completely barring the distribution of
religious literature. Our question then narrows down to this: Can those people
who live in or come to Chickasaw be denied freedom of press and religion
simply because a single company has legal title to all the town? For it is the
state's contention that the mere fact that all the property interests in the
town are held by a single company is enough to give that company power,
enforceable by a state statute, to abridge these freedoms.

4

We do not agree that the corporation's property interests settle the
question.2 The State urges in effect that the corporation's right to control
the inhabitants of Chickasaw is coextensive with the right of a homeowner to
regulate the conduct of his guests. We can not accept that contention.
Ownership does not always mean absolute dominion. The more an owner, for his
advantage, opens up his property for use by the public in general, the more do
his rights become circumscribed by the statutory and constitutional rights of
those who use it. Cf. Republic Aviation Corp. v. N.L.R.B., 324 U.S. 793, 65
S.Ct. 982, 985, 987, note 8, 157 A.L.R. 1081. Thus, the owners of privately
held bridges, ferries, turnpikes and railroads may not operate them as freely
as a farmer does his farm. Since these facilities are built and operated
primarily to benefit the public and since their operation is essentially a
public function, it is subject to state regulation.3 And, though the issue is
not directly analogous to the on before us we do want to point out by way of
illustration that such regulation may not result in an operation of these
facilities, even by privately owned companies, which unconstitutionally
interferes with and discriminates against interstate commerce. Port Richmond &
Bergen Point Ferry Co. v. Board of Chosen Freeholders of Hudson County, supra,
234 U.S. at page 326, 34 S.Ct. at page 823, 58 L.Ed. 1330, and cases cited,
234 U.S. at pages 328, 329, 34 S.Ct. at pages 824, 825; cf. South Carolina
State Highway Department v. Barnwell Brothers, 303 U.S. 177, 625, 58 S.Ct.
510, 82 L.Ed. 734. Had the corporation here owned the segment of the four-lane
highway which runs parallel to the 'business block' and operated the same
under a State franchise, doubtless no one would have seriously contended that
the corporation's property interest in the highway gave it power to obstruct
through traffic or to discriminate against interstate commerce. See County
Commissioners v. Chandler, 96 U.S. 205, 208, 24 L.Ed. 625; Donovan v.
Pennsylvania Co., supra, 199 U.S. at page 294, 26 S.Ct. at page 94, 50 L.Ed.
192; Covington Drawbridge Co. v. Shepherd, 21 How. 112, 125, 16 L.Ed. 38. And
even had there been no express franchise but mere acquiescence by the State in
the corporation's use of its property as a segment of the four-lane highway,
operation of all the highway, including the segment owned by the corporation,
would still have been performance of a public function and discrimination
would certainly have been illegal.4

5

We do not think it makes any significant constitutional difference as to the
relationship between the rights of the owner and those of the public that here
the State, instead of permitting the corporation to operate a highway,
permitted it to use its property as a town, operate a 'business block' in the
town and a street and sidewalk on that business block. Cf. Barney v. Keokuk,
94 U.S. 324, 340, 24 L.Ed. 224. Whether a corporation or a municipality owns
or possesses the town the public in either case has an identical interest in
the functioning of the community in such manner that the channels of
communication remain free. As we have heretofore stated, the town of Chickasaw
does not function differently from any other town. The 'business block' serves
as the community shopping center and is freely accessible and open to the
people in the area and those passing through. The managers appointed by the
corporation cannot curtail the liberty of press and religion of these people
consistently with the purposes of the Constitutional guarantees, and a state
statute, as the one here involved, which enforces such action by criminally
punishing those who attempt to distribute religious literature clearly
violates the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution.

6

Many people in the United States live in company-owned towns.5 These people,
just as residents of municipalities, are free citizens of their State and
country. Just as all other citizens they must make decisions which affect the
welfare of community and nation. To act as good citizens they must be
informed. In order to enable them to be properly informed their information
must be uncensored. There is no more reason for depriving these people of the
liberties guaranteed by the First and Fourteenth Amendments than there is for
curtailing these freedoms with respect to any other citizen.6

7

When we balance the Constitutional rights of owners of property against those
of the people to enjoy freedom of press and religion, as we must here, we
remain mindful of the fact that the latter occupy a preferred position.7 As we
have stated before, the right to exercise the liberties safeguarded by the
First Amendment 'lies at the foundation of free government by free men' and we
must in all cases 'weigh the circumstances and appraise * * * the reasons * *
* in support of the regulation of (those) rights.' Schneider v. State, 308
U.S. 147, 161, 60 S.Ct. 146, 151, 84 L.Ed. 155. In our view the circumstance
that the property rights to the premises where the deprivation of liberty,
here involved, took place, were held by others than the public, is not
sufficient to justify the State's permitting a corporation to govern a
community of citizens so as to restrict their fundamental liberties and the
enforcement of such restraint by the application of a State statute. Insofar
as the State has attempted to impose criminal punishment on appellant for
undertaking to distribute religious literature in a company town, its action
cannot stand. The case is reversed and the cause remanded for further
proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.

8

Reversed and remanded.

9

Mr. Justice JACKSON took no part in the consideration or decision of this
case.

10

Mr. Justice FRANKFURTER, concurring.

11

So long as the views which prevailed in Jones v. Opelika, 319 U.S. 103, 63
S.Ct. 890, 87 L.Ed. 1290, in connection with 316 U.S. 584, 600, 62 S.Ct. 1231,
1240, 86 L.Ed. 1691, 141 A.L.R. 514; Murdock v. Pennsylvania, 319 U.S. 105, 63
S.Ct. 870, 891, 87 L.Ed. 1292, 146 A.L.R. 81; Martin v. Struthers, 319 U.S.
141, 63 S.Ct. 862, 87 L.Ed. 1313, express the law of the Constitution, I am
unable to find legal significance in the fact that a town in which the
Constitutional freedoms of religion and speech are invoked happens to be
company-owned. These decisions accorded the purveyors of ideas, religious or
otherwise, 'a preferred position', Murdock v. Pennsylvania, supra, 319 U.S. at
page 115, 63 S.Ct. at page 876, 87 L.Ed. 1292, 146 A.L.R. 81, even to the
extent of relieving them from an unhampering and non-discriminatory duty of
bearing their share of the cost of maintaining the peace and the other
amenities of a civilized society. Constitutional privileges having such a
reach ought not to depend upon a State court's notion of the extent of
'dedication' or private property to public purposes. Local determinations of
such technical matters govern controversies affecting property. But when
decisions by State courts involving local matters are so interwoven with the
decision of the question of Constitutional rights that one necessarily
involves the other, State determination of local questions cannot control the
Federal Constitutional right.

12

A company-owned town gives rise to a net-work of property relations. As to
these, the judicial organ of a State has the final say. But a company-owned
town is a town. In its community aspects it does not differ from other towns.
These community aspects are decisive in adjusting the relations now before us,
and more particularly in adjudicating the clash of freedoms which the Bill of
Rights was designed to resolve--the freedom of the community to regulate its
life and the freedom of the individual to exercise his religion and to
disseminate his ideas. Title to property as defined by State law controls
property relations; it cannot control issues of civil liberties which arise
precisely because a company town is a town as well as a co geries of property
relations. And similarly the technical distinctions on which a finding of
'trespass' so often depends are too tenuous to control decision regarding the
scope of the vital liberties guaranteed by the Constitution.

13

Accordingly, as I have already indicated, so long as the scope of the
guarantees of the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment by absorption
of the First remains that which the Court gave to it in the series of cases in
the October Term, 1942, the circumstances of the present case seem to me
clearly to fall within it. And so I agree with the opinion of the Court,
except that portion of it which relies on arguments drawn from the
restrictions which the Commerce Clause imposes on State regulation of
commerce. It does not seem to me to further constitutional analysis to seek
help for the solution of the delicate problems arising under the First
Amendment from the very different order of problems which the Commerce Clause
presents. The latter involves an accommodation between National and State
powers operating in the same field. Where the First Amendment applies, it is a
denial of all governmental power in our Federal system.

14

Mr. Justice REED, dissenting.

15

Former decisions of this Court have interpreted generously the Constitutional
rights of people in this Land to exercise freedom of religion, of speech and
of the press.1 It has never been held and is not now by this opinion of the
Court that these rights are absolute and unlimited either in respect to the
manner or the place of their exercise.2 What the present decision establishes
as a principle is that one may remain on private property against the will of
the owner and contrary to the law of the state so long as the only objection
to his presence is that he is exercising an asserted right to spread there his
religious views. See Marrone v. Washington Jockey Club, 227 U.S. 633, 33 S.Ct.
401, 57 L.Ed. 679, 43 L.R.A.,N.S., 961. This is the first case to extend by
law the privilege of religious exercises beyond public places or to private
places without the assent of the owner. Compare Martin v. Struthers, 319 U.S.
141, 63 S.Ct. 862, 87 L.Ed. 1313.

16

As the rule now announced permits this intrusion, without possibility of
protection of the property by law, and apparently is equally applicable to the
freedom of speech and the press, it seems appropriate to express a dissent to
this, to us, novel Constitutional doctrine. Of course, such principle may
subsequently be restricted by this Court to the precise facts of this case--
that is to private property in a company town where the owner for his own
advantage has permitted a restricted public use by his licensees and invitees.
Such distinctions are of degree and require new arbitrary lines, judicially
drawn, instead of those hitherto established by legislation and precedent.
While the power of this Court, as the interpreter of the Constitution to
determine what use of real property by the owner makes that property subject,
at will, to the reasonable practice of religious exercises by strangers,
cannot be doubted, we find nothing in the principles of the First Amendment,
adopted now into the Fourteenth, which justifies their application to the
facts of this case.3

17

Both Federal and Alabama law permit, so far as we are aware, company towns. By
that we mean an area occupied by numerous houses, connected by passways,
fenced or not, as the owners may choose. These communities may be essential to
furnish proper and convenient living conditions for employees on isolated
operations in lumbering, mining, production of high explosives and large-scale
farming. The restrictions imposed by the owners upon the occupants are
sometimes galling to the employees and may appear unreasonable to outsiders.
Unless they fall under the prohibition of some legal rule, however, they are a
matter for adjustment between owner and licensee, or by appropriate
legislation. Compare Western Turf Ass'n v. Greenberg, 204 U.S. 359, 27 S.Ct.
384, 51 L.Ed. 520.

18

Alabama has a statute generally applicable to all privately owned premises. It
is Title 14, Section 426, Alabama Code 1940 which so far as pertinent reads as
follows:

19

'Trespass after warning.--Any person who, without legal cause or good excuse,
enters into the dwelling house or on the premises of another, after having
been warned, within six months preceding, not to do so; or any person, who,
having entered into the dwelling house or on the premises of another without
having been warned within six months not to do so, and fails or refuses,
without legal cause or good excuse, to leave immediately on being ordered or
requested to do so by the person in possession, his agent or representative,
shall, on conviction, be fined not more than one hundred dollars, and may also
be imprisoned in the county jail, or sentenced to hard labor for the county,
for not more than three months.'

20

Appellant was distributing religious pamphlets on a privately owned passway or
sidewalk thirty feet removed from a public highway of the State of Alabama and
remained on these private premises after an authorized order to get off. We do
not understand from the record that there was objection to appellant's use of
the nearby public highway and under our decisions she could rightfully have
continued her activities a few feet from the spot she insisted upon using. An
owner of property may very well have been willing for the public to use the
private passway for business purposes and yet have been unwilling to furnish
space for street trades or a location for the practice of religious
exhortations by itinerants. The passway here in question was not put to any
different use than other private passways that lead to privately owned areas,
amusement places, resort hotels or other businesses. There had been no
dedication of the sidewalk to the public use, express or implied. Alabama so
decided and we understand that this Court accepts that conclusion. Alabama,
also, decided that appellant violated by her activities the above quoted state
statute.

21

The Court calls attention to the fact that the owners of public utilities,
bridges, ferries, turnpikes and railroads are subject to state regulation of
rates and are forbidden to discriminate against interstate commerce. This is
quite true but we doubt if the Court means to imply that the property of these
utilities may be utilized, gainst the companies' wishes for religious
exercises of the kind in question.

22

A state does have the moral duty of furnishing the opportunity for
information, education and religious enlightenment to its inhabitants,
including those who live in company towns, but it has not heretofore been
adjudged that it must commandeer, without compensation, the private property
of other citizens to carry out that obligation. Heretofore this Court has
sustained the right of employees, under an appropriate statute, protecting
full freedom of employee organization, to solicit union membership in
nonworking time on the property of an employer and against his express
prohibition. This is because the prohibition is an impediment to the right of
organization which is protected by a statute which governs a relation between
employers and employees if and when the latter are admitted to the employers'
premises as licensees. It was recognized in the opinion that the freedom of
solicitation was the result of a regulatory statute and was not a
Constitutional right. Republic Aviation Corp. v. National Labor Relations
Board, 324 U.S. 793, 65 S.Ct. 982, 988, 157 A.L.R. 1081. In the area which is
covered by the guarantees of the First Amendment, this Court has been careful
to point out that the owner of property may protect himself against the
intrusion of strangers. Although in Martin v. Struthers, 319 U.S. 141, 63
S.Ct. 862, 87 L.Ed. 1313, an ordinance forbidding the summonsing of the
occupants of a dwelling to receive handbills was held invalid because in
conflict with the freedom of speech and press, this Court pointed out at page
147 of 319 U.S., at page 865 of 63 S.Ct., that after warning the property
owner would be protected from annoyance.4 The very Alabama statute which is
now held powerless to protect the property of the Gulf Shipbuilding
Corporation, after notice, from this trespass was there cited, note 10, to
show that it would protect the householder, after notice. The right to
communicate ideas was expressed by us in Jamison v. Texas, 318 U.S. 413, 416,
63 S.Ct. 669, 672, 87 L.Ed. 869, as follows: 'But one who is rightfully on a
street which the state has left open to the public carries with him there as
elsewhere the constitutional right to express his views in an orderly
fashion.'

23

Our Constitution guarantees to every man the right to express his views in an
orderly fashion. An essential element of 'orderly' is that the man shall also
have a right to use the place he chooses for his exposition. The rights of the
owner, which the Constitution protects as well as the right of free speech,
are not outweighed by the interests of the trespass r, even though he
trespasses in behalf of religion or free speech. We cannot say that Jehovah's
Witnesses can claim the privilege of a license, which has never been granted,
to hold their meetings in other private places, merely because the owner has
admitted the public to them for other limited purposes. Even though we have
reached the point where this Court is required to force private owners to open
their property for the practice there of religious activities or propaganda
distasteful to the owner, because of the public interest in freedom of speech
and religion, there is no need for the application of such a doctrine here.
Appellant, as we have said, was free to engage in such practices on the public
highways, without becoming a trespasser on the company's property.

24

The CHIEF JUSTICE and Mr. Justice BURTON join in this dissent.

1

Hague v. C.I.O., 307 U.S. 496, 59 S.Ct. 954, 83 L.Ed. 1423; Schneider v.
State, 308 U.S. 147, 60 S.Ct. 146, 84 L.Ed. 155; Thornhill v. Alabama, 310
U.S. 88, 60 S.Ct. 736, 84 L.Ed. 1093; Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296,
60 S.Ct. 900, 84 L.Ed. 1213, 128 A.L.R. 1352; dissent of Chief Justice Stone
in Jones v. Opelika, 316 U.S. 584, 600, 62 S.Ct. 1231, 1240, 86 L.Ed. 1691,
141 A.L.R. 514, adopted as the opinion of the Court, 319 U.S. 103, 63 S.Ct.
890, 87 L.Ed. 1290; Largent v. Texas, 318 U.S. 418, 63 S.Ct. 667, 87 L.Ed.
873; Murdock v. Pennsylvania, 319 U.S. 105, 63 S.Ct. 870, 891, 87 L.Ed. 1292,
146 A.L.R. 81; Follett v. McCormick, 321 U.S. 573, 64 S.Ct. 717, 88 L.Ed. 938,
152 A.L.R. 317.

2

We do not question the State court's determination of the issue of
'dedication.' That determination means that the corporation could if it so
desired, entirely close the sidewalk and the town to the public and is
decisive of all questions of state law which depend on the owner's being
estopped to reclaim possession of, and the public's holding the title to, or
having received an irrevocable easement in, the premises. City of Demopolis v.
Webb, 87 Ala. 659, 6 So. 408; Hamilton v. Town of Warrior, 215 Ala. 670, 112
So. 136; Town of Leeds v. Sharp, 218 Ala. 403, 405, 118 So. 572; Forney v.
Calhoun County, 84 Ala. 215, 4 So. 153; Cloverdale Homes v. Cloverdale, 182
Ala. 419, 62 So. 712. The 'dedication' of a road to the public may also be
decisive of whether, under Alabama law, obstructing the road constitutes a
crime, Beverly v. State, 28 Ala.App. 451, 185 So. 768, and whether certain
action on or near the road amounts to a tort. Thrasher v. Burr, 202 Ala. 307,
80 So. 372. But determination of the issue of 'dedication' does not decide the
question under the Federal Constitution here involved.

3

Clark's Ferry Bridge Co. v. Public Service Commission of Pennsylvania, 291
U.S. 227, 54 S.Ct. 427, 78 L.Ed. 767; American Toll Bridge Co. v. Railroad
Commission of California, 307 U.S. 486, 59 S.Ct. 948, 83 L.Ed. 1414; Mills et
al. v. St. Clair County et al., 8 How. 569, 581, 12 L.Ed. 1201; Port Richmond
& Bergen Point Ferry Co. v. Board of Chosen Freeholders of Hudson County, 824,
825, 826, 58 L.Ed. 1330; Covington & L. Turnpike Road Co. v. Sanford, 164 U.S.
578, 17 S.Ct. 198, 41 L.Ed. 560; Norfolk & S. Turnpike Co. v. Virginia, 225
U.S. 264, 32 S.Ct. 828, 56 L.Ed. 1082; Donovan v. Pennsylvania Co., 199 U.S.
279, 26 S.Ct. 91, 50 L.Ed. 192, and cases cited on pages 293--295 of 199 U.S.,
on pages 94, 95 of 26 S.Ct.

4

And certainly the corporation can no more deprive people of freedom of press
and religion than it can discriminate against commerce. In his dissenting
opinion in Jones v. Opelika, 316 U.S. 584, 600, 62 S.Ct. 1231, 1240, 86 L.Ed.
1691, 141 A.L.R. 514, which later was adopted as the opinion of the Court, 319
U.S. 103, 104, 63 S.Ct. 890, 87 L.Ed. 1290, Mr. Chief Justice Stone made the
following pertinent statement: 'Freedom of press and religion, explicitly
guaranteed by the Constitution, must at least be entitled to the same freedom
from burdensome taxation which it has been thought that the more general
phraseology of the commerce clause has extended to interstate commerce.
Whatever doub ยง may be entertained as to this Court's function to relieve,
unaided by Congressional legislation, from burdensome taxation under the
commerce clause, see Gwin, White & Prince, Inc., v. Henneford, 305 U.S. 434,
441, 446--455, 59 S.Ct. 325, 328, 331--335, 83 L.Ed. 272; McCarroll v. Dixie
Lines, 309 U.S. 176, 184, 185, 60 S.Ct. 504, 508 (509), 84 L.Ed. 683, it
cannot be thought that that function is wanting under the explicit guaranties
of freedom of speech, press and religion.' 316 U.S. at pages 610, 611, 62
S.Ct. at page 1245, 86 L.Ed. 1691, 141 A.L.R. 514.

5

In the bituminous coal industry alone, approximately one-half of the miners in
the United States lived in company-owned houses in the period from 1922--23\.
The percentage varied from 9 per cent in Illinois and Indiana and 64 per cent
in Kentucky, to almost 80 per cent in West Virginia. U.S. Coal Commission,
Report, 1925, Part III, pp. 1467, 1469 summarized in Morris, The Plight of the
Coal Miner, Philadelphia, 1934, Ch. VI, p. 86. The most recent statistics we
found available are in Magnusson, Housing by Employers in the United States,
Bureau of Labor Statistics Bulletin No. 263 (Misc. Ser.) p. 11. See also
United States Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, Data on Pay Roll
Deductions, Union Manufacturing Company, Union Point, Georgia, June 1941;
Rhyne, Some Southern Cotton Mill Workers and Their Villages, Chapel Hill, 1930
(Study completed under the direction of the Institute for Research in Social
Science at the University of North Carolina); Comment, Urban Redevelopment, 54
Yale L.J. 116.

6

As to the suppression of civil liberties in company-towns and the need of
those who live there for Constitutional protection, see the summary of facts
aired before the Senate, Committee on Education and Labor, Violations of Free
Speech and Rights of Labor, Hearings pursuant to S.Rec. 266, summarized in
Bowden, Freedom for Wage Earners, Annals of The American Academy of Political
and Social Science, Nov. 1938, p. 185; Z. Chafee, The Inquiring Mind (New
York, 1928), pp. 173--74; Pamphlet published in 1923 by the Bituminous
Operators' Special Commi tee under the title The Company Town; U.S. Coal
Commission, Report, supra, Part III, p. 1331.

7

Jones v. Opelika, supra, 316 U.S. at page 608, 62 S.Ct. at page 1244, 86 L.Ed.
1691, 141 A.L.R. 514; Murdock v. Pennsylvania, supra, 319 U.S. at page 115, 63
S.Ct. at page 876, 87 L.Ed. 1292, 146 A.L.R. 81; Follett v. McCormick, supra,
321 U.S. at page 577, 64 S.Ct. at page 719, 88 L.Ed. 938, 152 A.L.R. 317.

1

Lovell v. Griffin, 303 U.S. 444, 58 S.Ct. 666, 82 L.Ed. 949; Hague v. C.I.O.,
307 U.S. 496, 59 S.Ct. 954, 83 L.Ed. 1423; Schneider v. State, 308 U.S. 147,
60 S.Ct. 146, 84 L.Ed. 155; Thornhill v. Alabama, 310 U.S. 88, 60 S.Ct. 736,
84 L.Ed. 1093; Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296, 60 S.Ct. 900, 84 L.Ed.
1213, 128 A.L.R. 1352; dissent of Chief Justice Stone in Jones v. Opelika, 316
U.S. 584, 600, 62 S.Ct. 1231, 1240, 86 L.Ed. 1691, 141 A.L.R. 514, adopted as
the opinion of the Court, 319 U.S. 103, 63 S.Ct. 890, 87 L.Ed. 1290; Jamison
v. Texas, 318 U.S. 413, 63 S.Ct. 669, 87 L.Ed. 869; Largent v. Texas, 318 U.S.
418, 63 S.Ct. 667, 87 L.Ed. 873; Murdock v. Pennsylvania, 319 U.S. 105, 63
S.Ct. 870, 891, 87 L.Ed. 1292, 146 A.L.R. 81; Martin v. Struthers, 319 U.S.
141, 63 S.Ct. 862, 87 L.Ed. 1313; Follett v. McCormick, 321 U.S. 573, 64 S.Ct.
717, 88 L.Ed. 938, 152 A.L.R. 317.

2

Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47, 39 S.Ct. 247, 63 L.Ed. 470; Gitlow v.
New York, 268 U.S. 652, 45 S.Ct. 625, 69 L.Ed. 1138; Near v. Minnesota, 283
U.S. 697, 51 S.Ct. 625, 75 L.Ed. 1357; Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296,
60 S.Ct. 900, 84 L.Ed. 1213, 128 A.L.R. 1352; Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315
U.S. 568, 62 S.Ct. 766, 86 L.Ed. 1031; Prince v. Massachusetts, 321 U.S. 158,
64 S.Ct. 438, 88 L.Ed. 645.

3

'Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or
of the press; or of the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to
petition the Government for a redress of grievances.' First Amendment to the
Constitution.

4

'The dangers of distribution can so easily be controlled by traditional legal
methods, leaving to each householder the full right to decide whether he will
receive strangers as visitors, that stringent prohibition can serve no purpose
but that forbidden by the Constitution, the naked restriction of the
dissemination of ideas.

'Traditionally and American law punishes persons who enter onto the property
of another after having been warned by the owner to keep off. General trespass
after warning statutes exist in at least twenty states, while similar statutes
of narrower scope are on the books of at least twelve states more. We know of
no state which, as does the Struthers ordinance in effect, makes a person a
criminal trespasser if he enters the property of another for an innocent
purpose without an explicit command from the owners to stay away. The National
Institute of Municipal Law Officers has proposed a form of regulation to its
member cities which would make it an offense for any person to ring the bell
of a householder who has appropriately indicated that he is unwilling to be
disturbed. This or any similar regulation leaves the decision as to whether
distributors of literature may lawfully call at a home where it belongs--with
the homeowner himself.' Martin v. Struthers, 319 U.S. 141, 147, 148, 63 S.Ct.
862, 865, 866, 87 L.Ed. 1313.

