506 U.S. 224

113 S.Ct. 732

122 L.Ed.2d 1

Walter L. NIXON, Petitioner  
v.  
UNITED STATES et al.

No. 91-740.

Argued Oct. 14, 1992.

Decided Jan. 13, 1993.

_Syllabus_ *

After petitioner Nixon, the Chief Judge of a Federal District Court, was
convicted of federal crimes and sentenced to prison, the House of
Representatives adopted articles of impeachment against him and presented them
to the Senate. Following proceedings pursuant to Senate Rule XI--which allows
a committee of Senators to hear evidence against an impeached individual and
to report that evidence to the full Senate--the Senate voted to convict Nixon,
and the presiding officer entered judgment removing him from his judgeship. He
then commenced the present suit for a declaratory judgment and reinstatement
of his judicial salary and privileges, arguing that, because Senate Rule XI
prohibits the whole Senate from taking part in the evidentiary hearings, it
violates the first sentence of the Constitution's Impeachment Trial Clause,
Art. I, § 3, cl. 6, which provides that the "Senate shall have the sole Power
to try all Impeachments." The District Court held that his claim was
nonjusticiable, _i.e.,_ involved a political question that could not be
resolved by the courts. The Court of Appeals affirmed.

_Held:_ Nixon's claim that Senate Rule XI violates the Impeachment Trial
Clause is nonjusticiable. Pp. ____.

(a) A controversy is nonjusticiable where there is "a textually demonstrable
constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department;
or a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving it
. . . ." _Baker v. Carr,_ 369 U.S. 186, 217, 82 S.Ct. 691, 710, 7 L.Ed.2d 663.
These two concepts are not completely separate; the lack of judicially
manageable standards may strengthen the conclusion that there is a textually
demonstrable commitment to a coordinate branch. Pp. ____.

(b) The language and structure of Art. I, § 3, cl. 6, demonstrate a textual
commitment of impeachment to the Senate. Nixon's argument that the use of the
word "try" in the Clause's first sentence impliedly requires a judicial-style
trial by the full Senate that is subject to judicial review is rejected. The
conclusion that "try" lacks sufficient precision to afford any judicially
manageable standard of review is compelled by older and modern dictionary
definitions, and is fortified by the existence of the three very specific
requirements that the Clause's second and third sentences do impose--that the
Senate's members must be under oath or affirmation, that a two-thirds vote is
required to convict, and that the Chief Justice presides when the President is
tried--the precise nature of which suggests that the Framers did not intend to
impose additional limitations on the form of the Senate proceedings. The
Clause's first sentence must instead be read as a grant of authority to the
Senate to determine whether an individual should be acquitted or convicted,
and the common sense and dictionary meanings of the word "sole" indicate that
this authority is reposed in the Senate alone. Nixon's attempts to negate the
significance of "sole" are unavailing, while his alternative reading of the
word as requiring impeachment only by the full Senate is unnatural and would
impose on the Senate additional procedural requirements that would be
inconsistent with the three express limitations that the Clause sets out. A
review of the Constitutional Convention's history and the contemporary
commentary supports a reading of the constitutional language as deliberately
placing the impeachment power in the Legislature, with no judicial
involvement, even for the limited purpose of judicial review. Pp. ____.

(c) Justiciability is also refuted by (1) the lack of finality inherent in
exposing the country's political life particularly if the President were
impeached--to months, or perhaps years, of chaos during judicial review of
Senate impeachment proceedings, or during any retrial that a differently
constituted Senate might conduct if its first judgment of conviction were
invalidated, and by (2) the difficulty of fashioning judicial relief other
than simply setting aside the Senate's judgment of conviction. See _Baker,
supra,_ 369 U.S., at 210, 82 S.Ct., at 706. Pp. ____.

(d) A holding of nonjusticiability is consistent with this Court's opinion in
_Powell v. McCormack,_ 395 U.S. 486, 89 S.Ct. 1944, 23 L.Ed.2d 491. Unlike the
situation in that case, there is no separate constitutional provision which
could be defeated by allowing the Senate final authority to determine the
meaning of the word "try" in Art. I, § 3, cl. 6. While courts possess power to
review legislative action that transgresses identifiable textual limits, the
word "try" does not provide such a limit on the authority committed to the
Senate. Pp. ____.

290 U.S.App.D.C. 420, 938 F.2d 239, affirmed.

REHNQUIST, C.J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which STEVENS,
O'CONNOR, SCALIA, KENNEDY, and THOMAS, JJ., joined. STEVENS, J., filed a
concurring opinion. WHITE, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in
which BLACKMUN, J., joined. SOUTER, J., filed an opinion concurring in the
judgment.

David O. Stewart, Washington, D.C., for petitioner.

Solicitor Gen. Kenneth W. Starr, Washington, D.C., for respondent.

Chief Justice REHNQUIST delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

Petitioner Walter L. Nixon, Jr., asks this court to decide whether Senate Rule
XI, which allows a committee of Senators to hear evidence against an
individual who has been impeached and to report that evidence to the full
Senate, violates the Impeachment Trial Clause, Art. I, § 3, cl. 6. That Clause
provides that the "Senate shall have the sole Power to try all Impeachments."
But before we reach the merits of such a claim, we must decide whether it is
"justiciable," that is, whether it is a claim that may be resolved by the
courts. We conclude that it is not.

2

Nixon, a former Chief Judge of the United States District Court for the
Southern District of Mississippi, was convicted by a jury of two counts of
making false statements before a federal grand jury and sentenced to prison.
See _United States v. Nixon,_ 816 F.2d 1022 (CA5 1987). The grand jury
investigation stemmed from reports that Nixon had accepted a gratuity from a
Mississippi businessman in exchange for asking a local district attorney to
halt the prosecution of the businessman's son. Because Nixon refused to resign
from his office as a United States District Judge, he continued to collect his
judicial salary while serving out his prison sentence. See H.R.Rep. No.
101-36, p. 13 (1989).

3

On May 10, 1989, the House of Representatives adopted three articles of
impeachment for high crimes and misdemeanors. The first two articles charged
Nixon with giving false testimony before the grand jury and the third article
charged him with bringing disrepute on the Federal Judiciary. See 135
Cong.Rec. H1811.

4

After the House presented the articles to the Senate, the Senate voted to
invoke its own Impeachment Rule XI, under which the presiding officer appoints
a committee of Senators to "receive evidence and take testimony." Senate
Impeachment Rule XI, reprinted in Senate Manual, S. Doc. No. 101-1, 101st
Cong., 1st Sess., 186 (1989).1 The Senate committee held four days of
hearings, during which 10 witnesses, including Nixon, testified. S.Rep. No.
101-164, p. 4 (1989). Pursuant to Rule XI, the committee presented the full
Senate with a complete transcript of the proceeding and a report stating the
uncontested facts and summarizing the evidence on the contested facts. See
_id.,_ at 3-4. Nixon and the House impeachment managers submitted extensive
final briefs to the full Senate and delivered arguments from the Senate floor
during the three hours set aside for oral argument in front of that body.
Nixon himself gave a personal appeal, and several Senators posed questions
directly to both parties. 135 Cong.Rec. S14493-14517 (Nov. 1, 1989). The
Senate voted by more than the constitutionally required two-thirds majority to
convict Nixon on the first two articles. _Id.,_ at S14635 (Nov. 3, 1989). The
presiding officer then entered judgment removing Nixon from his office as
United States District Judge.

5

Nixon thereafter commenced the present suit, arguing that Senate Rule XI
violates the constitutional grant of authority to the Senate to "try" all
impeachments because it prohibits the whole Senate from taking part in the
evidentiary hearings. See Art. I, § 3, cl. 6. Nixon sought a declaratory
judgment that his impeachment conviction was void and that his judicial salary
and privileges should be reinstated. The District Court held that his claim
was nonjusticiable, 744 F.Supp. 9 (D.C.1990), and the Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia Circuit agreed. 290 U.S.App.D.C. 420, 938 F.2d 239
(1991).

6

A controversy is nonjusticiable-- _i.e.,_ involves a political question--where
there is "a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a
coordinate political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable and
manageable standards for resolving it. . . ." _Baker v. Carr,_ 369 U.S. 186,
217, 82 S.Ct. 691, 710, 7 L.Ed.2d 663 (1962). But the courts must, in the
first instance, interpret the text in question and determine whether and to
what extent the issue is textually committed. See _ibid.; Powell v.
McCormack,_ 395 U.S. 486, 519, 89 S.Ct. 1944, 1962-1963, 23 L.Ed.2d 491
(1969). As the discussion that follows makes clear, the concept of a textual
commitment to a coordinate political department is not completely separate
from the concept of a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards
for resolving it; the lack of judicially manageable standards may strengthen
the conclusion that there is a textually demonstrable commitment to a
coordinate branch.

7

In this case, we must examine Art. I, § 3, cl. 6, to determine the scope of
authority conferred upon the Senate by the Framers regarding impeachment. It
provides:

8

"The Senate shall have the sole Power to try all Impeachments. When sitting
for that Purpose, they shall be on Oath or Affirmation. When the President of
the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside: And no Person
shall be convicted without the Concurrence of two thirds of the Members
present."

9

The language and structure of this Clause are revealing. The first sentence is
a grant of authority to the Senate, and the word "sole" indicates that this
authority is reposed in the Senate and nowhere else. The next two sentences
specify requirements to which the Senate proceedings shall conform: the Senate
shall be on oath or affirmation, a two-thirds vote is required to convict, and
when the President is tried the Chief Justice shall preside.

10

Petitioner argues that the word "try" in the first sentence imposes by
implication an additional requirement on the Senate in that the proceedings
must be in the nature of a judicial trial. From there petitioner goes on to
argue that this limitation precludes the Senate from delegating to a select
committee the task of hearing the testimony of witnesses, as was done pursuant
to Senate Rule XI. " '[T]ry' means more than simply 'vote on' or 'review' or
'judge.' In 1787 and today, trying a case means hearing the evidence, not
scanning a cold record." Brief for Petitioner 25. Petitioner concludes from
this that courts may review whether or not the Senate "tried" him before
convicting him.

11

There are several difficulties with this position which lead us ultimately to
reject it. The word "try," both in 1787 and later, has considerably broader
meanings than those to which petitioner would limit it. Older dictionaries
define try as "[t]o examine" or "[t]o examine as a judge." See 2 S. Johnson, A
Dictionary of the English Language (1785). In more modern usage the term has
various meanings. For example, try can mean "to examine or investigate
judicially," "to conduct the trial of," or "to put to the test by experiment,
investigation, or trial." Webster's Third New International Dictionary 2457
(1971). Petitioner submits that "try," as contained in T. Sheridan, Dictionary
of the English Language (1796), means "to examine as a judge; to bring before
a judicial tribunal." Based on the variety of definitions, however, we cannot
say that the Framers used the word "try" as an implied limitation on the
method by which the Senate might proceed in trying impeachments. "As a rule
the Constitution speaks in general terms, leaving Congress to deal with
subsidiary matters of detail as the public interests and changing conditions
may require. . . ." _Dillon v._ _Gloss,_ 256 U.S. 368, 376, 41 S.Ct. 510,
512-513, 65 L.Ed. 994 (1921).

12

The conclusion that the use of the word "try" in the first sentence of the
Impeachment Trial Clause lacks sufficient precision to afford any judicially
manageable standard of review of the Senate's actions is fortified by the
existence of the three very specific requirements that the Constitution does
impose on the Senate when trying impeachments: the members must be under oath,
a two-thirds vote is required to convict, and the Chief Justice presides when
the President is tried. These limitations are quite precise, and their nature
suggests that the Framers did not intend to impose additional limitations on
the form of the Senate proceedings by the use of the word "try" in the first
sentence.

13

Petitioner devotes only two pages in his brief to negating the significance of
the word "sole" in the first sentence of Clause 6. As noted above, that
sentence provides that "[t]he Senate shall have the sole Power to try all
Impeachments." We think that the word "sole" is of considerable significance.
Indeed, the word "sole" appears only one other time in the Constitution--with
respect to the House of Representatives' " _sole_ Power of Impeachment." Art.
I, § 2, cl. 5 (emphasis added). The common sense meaning of the word "sole" is
that the Senate alone shall have authority to determine whether an individual
should be acquitted or convicted. The dictionary definition bears this out.
"Sole" is defined as "having no companion," "solitary," "being the only one,"
and "functioning . . . independently and without assistance or interference."
Webster's Third New International Dictionary 2168 (1971). If the courts may
review the actions of the Senate in order to determine whether that body
"tried" an impeached official, it is difficult to see how the Senate would be
"functioning . . . independently and without assistance or interference."

14

Nixon asserts that the word "sole" has no substantive meaning. To support this
contention, he argues that the word is nothing more than a mere "cosmetic
edit" added by the Committee of Style after the delegates had approved the
substance of the Impeachment Trial Clause. There are two difficulties with
this argument. First, accepting as we must the proposition that the Committee
of Style had no authority from the Convention to alter the meaning of the
Clause, see 2 Records of the Federal Convention of 1787, p. 553 (M. Farrand
ed. 1966) (hereinafter Farrand), we must presume that the Committee's
reorganization or rephrasing accurately captured what the Framers meant in
their unadorned language. See _Powell v. McCormack,_ 395 U.S., at 538-539, 89
S.Ct. at 1972-1973. That is, we must presume that the Committee did its job.
This presumption is buttressed by the fact that the Constitutional Convention
voted on, and accepted, the Committee of Style's linguistic version. See 2
Farrand 663-667. We agree with the Government that "the word 'sole' is
entitled to no less weight than any other word of the text, because the
Committee revision perfected what 'had been agreed to.' " Brief for
Respondents 25. Second, carrying Nixon's argument to its logical conclusion
would constrain us to say that the _second to last draft_ would govern in
every instance where the Committee of Style added an arguably substantive
word. Such a result is at odds with the fact that the Convention passed the
Committee's version, and with the well established rule that the plain
language of the enacted text is the best indicator of intent.

15

Petitioner also contends that the word "sole" should not bear on the question
of justiciability because Art. II, § 2, cl. 1, of the Constitution grants the
President pardon authority "except in Cases of Impeachment." He argues that
such a limitation on the President's pardon power would not have been
necessary if the Framers thought that the Senate alone had authority to deal
with such questions. But the granting of a pardon is in no sense an
overturning of a judgment of conviction by some other tribunal; it is "[a]n
executive action that mitigates or sets aside _punishment_ for a crime."
Black's Law Dictionary 1113 (6th ed. 1990) (emphasis added). Authority in the
Senate to determine procedures for trying an impeached official, unreviewable
by the courts, is therefore not at all inconsistent with authority in the
President to grant a pardon to the convicted official. The exception from the
President's pardon authority of cases of impeachment was a separate
determination by the Framers that executive clemency should not be available
in such cases.

16

Petitioner finally argues that even if significance be attributed to the word
"sole" in the first sentence of the clause, the authority granted is to the
Senate, and this means that "the Senate--not the courts, not a lay jury, not a
Senate Committee shall try impeachments." Brief for Petitioner 42. It would be
possible to read the first sentence of the Clause this way, but it is not a
natural reading. Petitioner's interpretation would bring into judicial purview
not merely the sort of claim made by petitioner, but other similar claims
based on the conclusion that the word "Senate" has imposed by implication
limitations on procedures which the Senate might adopt. Such limitations would
be inconsistent with the construction of the Clause as a whole, which, as we
have noted, sets out three express limitations in separate sentences.

17

The history and contemporary understanding of the impeachment provisions
support our reading of the constitutional language. The parties do not offer
evidence of a single word in the history of the Constitutional Convention or
in contemporary commentary that even alludes to the possibility of judicial
review in the context of the impeachment powers. See 290 U.S.App.D.C., at 424,
938 F.2d at 243; R. Berger, Impeachment: The Constitutional Problems 116
(1973). This silence is quite meaningful in light of the several explicit
references to the availability of judicial review as a check on the
Legislature's power with respect to bills of attainder, _ex post facto_ laws,
and statutes. See The Federalist No. 78, p. 524 (J. Cooke ed. 1961)
("Limitations . . . can be preserved in practice no other way than through the
medium of the courts of justice").

18

The Framers labored over the question of where the impeachment power should
lie. Significantly, in at least two considered scenarios the power was placed
with the Federal Judiciary. See 1 Farrand 21-22 (Virginia Plan); _id.,_ at 244
(New Jersey Plan). Indeed, Madison and the Committee of Detail proposed that
the Supreme Court should have the power to determine impeachments. See 2
_id.,_ at 551 (Madison); _id.,_ at 178-179, 186 (Committee of Detail). Despite
these proposals, the Convention ultimately decided that the Senate would have
"the sole Power to Try all Impeachments." Art. I, § 3, cl. 6. According to
Alexander Hamilton, the Senate was the "most fit depositary of this important
trust" because its members are representatives of the people. See The
Federalist No. 65, p. 440 (J. Cooke ed. 1961). The Supreme Court was not the
proper body because the Framers "doubted whether the members of that tribunal
would, at all times, be endowed with so eminent a portion of fortitude as
would be called for in the execution of so difficult a task" or whether the
Court "would possess the degree of credit and authority" to carry out its
judgment if it conflicted with the accusation brought by the Legislature--the
people's representative. See _id.,_ at 441. In addition, the Framers believed
the Court was too small in number: "The awful discretion, which a court of
impeachments must necessarily have, to doom to honor or to infamy the most
confidential and the most distinguished characters of the community, forbids
the commitment of the trust to a small number of persons." _Id.,_ at 441-442.

19

There are two additional reasons why the Judiciary, and the Supreme Court in
particular, were not chosen to have any role in impeachments. First, the
Framers recognized that most likely there would be two sets of proceedings for
individuals who commit impeachable offenses--the impeachment trial and a
separate criminal trial. In fact, the Constitution explicitly provides for two
separate proceedings. See Art. I, § 3, cl. 7. The Framers deliberately
separated the two forums to avoid raising the specter of bias and to ensure
independent judgments:

20

"Would it be proper that the persons, who had disposed of his fame and his
most valuable rights as a citizen in one trial, should in another trial, for
the same offence, be also the disposers of his life and his fortune? Would
there not be the greatest reason to apprehend, that error in the first
sentence would be the parent of error in the second sentence? That the strong
bias of one decision would be apt to overrule the influence of any new lights,
which might be brought to vary the complexion of another decision?" The
Federalist No. 65, p. 442 (J. Cooke ed. 1961).

21

[[DCQ!]] Certainly judicial review of the Senate's "trial" would introduce the
same risk of bias as would participation in the trial itself.

22

Second, judicial review would be inconsistent with the Framers' insistence
that our system be one of checks and balances. In our constitutional system,
impeachment was designed to be the _only_ check on the Judicial Branch by the
Legislature. On the topic of judicial accountability, Hamilton wrote:

23

"The precautions for their responsibility are comprised in the article
respecting impeachments. They are liable to be impeached for mal-conduct by
the house of representatives, and tried by the senate, and if convicted, may
be dismissed from office and disqualified for holding any other. _This is the
only provision on the point, which is consistent with the necessary
independence of the judicial character, and is the only one which we find in
our own constitution in respect to our own judges." Id.,_ No. 79, pp. 532-533
(emphasis added).

24

Judicial involvement in impeachment proceedings, even if only for purposes of
judicial review, is counterintuitive because it would eviscerate the
"important constitutional check" placed on the Judiciary by the Framers. See
_id.,_ No. 81, p. 545. Nixon's argument would place final reviewing authority
with respect to impeachments in the hands of the same body that the
impeachment process is meant to regulate.2

25

Nevertheless, Nixon argues that judicial review is necessary in order to place
a check on the Legislature. Nixon fears that if the Senate is given
unreviewable authority to interpret the Impeachment Trial Clause, there is a
grave risk that the Senate will usurp judicial power. The Framers anticipated
this objection and created two constitutional safeguards to keep the Senate in
check. The first safeguard is that the whole of the impeachment power is
divided between the two legislative bodies, with the House given the right to
accuse and the Senate given the right to judge. _Id.,_ No. 66, p. 446. This
split of authority "avoids the inconvenience of making the same persons both
accusers and judges; and guards against the danger of persecution from the
prevalency of a factious spirit in either of those branches." The second
safeguard is the two-thirds supermajority vote requirement. Hamilton explained
that "[a]s the concurrence of two-thirds of the senate will be requisite to a
condemnation, the security to innocence, from this additional circumstance,
will be as complete as itself can desire." _Ibid._

26

In addition to the textual commitment argument, we are persuaded that the lack
of finality and the difficulty of fashioning relief counsel against
justiciability. See _Baker v. Carr,_ 369 U.S., at 210, 82 S.Ct., at 706. We
agree with the Court of Appeals that opening the door of judicial review to
the procedures used by the Senate in trying impeachments would "expose the
political life of the country to months, or perhaps years, of chaos." 290
U.S.App.D.C., at 427, 938 F.2d, at 246. This lack of finality would manifest
itself most dramatically if the President were impeached. The legitimacy of
any successor, and hence his effectiveness, would be impaired severely, not
merely while the judicial process was running its course, but during any
retrial that a differently constituted Senate might conduct if its first
judgment of conviction were invalidated. Equally uncertain is the question of
what relief a court may give other than simply setting aside the judgment of
conviction. Could it order the reinstatement of a convicted federal judge, or
order Congress to create an additional judgeship if the seat had been filled
in the interim?

27

Petitioner finally contends that a holding of nonjusticiability cannot be
reconciled with our opinion in _Powell v. McCormack,_ 395 U.S. 486, 89 S.Ct.
1944, 23 L.Ed.2d 491 (1969). The relevant issue in _Powell_ was whether courts
could review the House of Representatives' conclusion that Powell was
"unqualified" to sit as a Member because he had been accused of
misappropriating public funds and abusing the process of the New York courts.
We stated that the question of justiciability turned on whether the
Constitution committed authority to the House to judge its members'
qualifications, and if so, the extent of that commitment. _Id.,_ at 519, 521,
89 S.Ct., at 1962-1963, 1963-1964. Article I, § 5 provides that "Each House
shall be the Judge of the Elections, Returns and Qualifications of its own
Members." In turn, Art. I, § 2 specifies three requirements for membership in
the House: The candidate must be at least 25 years of age, a citizen of the
United States for no less than seven years, and an inhabitant of the State he
is chosen to represent. We held that, in light of the three requirements
specified in the Constitution, the word "qualifications"--of which the House
was to be the Judge --was of a precise, limited nature. _Id.,_ at 522, 89
S.Ct., at 1964; see also The Federalist No. 60, p. 409 (J. Cooke ed. 1961)
("The qualifications of the persons who may choose or be chosen, as has been
remarked upon another occasion, are defined and fixed in the constitution; and
are _unalterable by the legislature._ ") (emphasis added) (quoted in _Powell,
supra,_ 395 U.S., at 539, 89 S.Ct., at 1973).

28

Our conclusion in _Powell_ was based on the fixed meaning of
"[q]ualifications" set forth in Art. I, § 2\. The claim by the House that its
power to "be the Judge of the Elections, Returns and Qualifications of its own
Members" was a textual commitment of unreviewable authority was defeated by
the existence of this separate provision specifying the only qualifications
which might be imposed for House membership. The decision as to whether a
member satisfied these qualifications _was_ placed with the House, but the
decision as to what these qualifications consisted of was not.

29

In the case before us, there is no separate provision of the Constitution
which could be defeated by allowing the Senate final authority to determine
the meaning of the word "try" in the Impeachment Trial Clause. We agree with
Nixon that courts possess power to review either legislative or executive
action that transgresses identifiable textual limits. As we have made clear,
"whether the action of [either the Legislative or Executive Branch] exceeds
whatever authority has been committed, is itself a delicate exercise in
constitutional interpretation, and is a responsibility of this Court as
ultimate interpreter of the Constitution." _Baker v. Carr, supra,_ 369 U.S.,
at 211, 82 S.Ct., at 706; accord, _Powell, supra,_ 395 U.S., at 521, 89 S.Ct.,
at 1963-1964. But we conclude, after exercising that delicate responsibility,
that the word "try" in the Impeachment Clause does not provide an identifiable
textual limit on the authority which is committed to the Senate.

30

For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the Court of Appeals is

31

_Affirmed._

32

Justice STEVENS, concurring.

33

For me, the debate about the strength of the inferences to be drawn from the
use of the words "sole" and "try" is far less significant than the central
fact that the Framers decided to assign the impeachment power to the
Legislative Branch. The disposition of the impeachment of Samuel Chase in 1805
demonstrated that the Senate is fully conscious of the profound importance of
that assignment, and nothing in the subsequent history of the Senate's
exercise of this extraordinary power suggests otherwise. See generally 3 A.
Beveridge, The Life of John Marshall 169-222 (1919); W. Rehnquist, Grand
Inquests 275-278 (1992). Respect for a coordinate Branch of the Government
forecloses any assumption that improbable hypotheticals like those mentioned
by Justice WHITE and Justice SOUTER will ever occur. Accordingly, the wise
policy of judicial restraint, coupled with the potential anomalies associated
with a contrary view, see _ante_ at ____, provide a sufficient justification
for my agreement with the views of THE CHIEF JUSTICE.

34

Justice WHITE, with whom Justice BLACKMUN joins, concurring in the judgment.

35

Petitioner contends that the method by which the Senate convicted him on two
articles of impeachment violates Art. I, § 3, cl. 6 of the Constitution, which
mandates that the Senate "try" impeachments. The Court is of the view that the
Constitution forbids us even to consider his contention. I find no such
prohibition and would therefore reach the merits of the claim. I concur in the
judgment because the Senate fulfilled its constitutional obligation to "try"
petitioner.

36

* It should be said at the outset that, as a practical matter, it will likely make little difference whether the Court's or my view controls this case. This is so because the Senate has very wide discretion in specifying impeachment trial procedures and because it is extremely unlikely that the Senate would abuse its discretion and insist on a procedure that could not be deemed a trial by reasonable judges. Even taking a wholly practical approach, I would prefer not to announce an unreviewable discretion in the Senate to ignore completely the constitutional direction to "try" impeachment cases. When asked at oral argument whether that direction would be satisfied if, after a House vote to impeach, the Senate, without any procedure whatsoever, unanimously found the accused guilty of being "a bad guy," counsel for the United States answered that the Government's theory "leads me to answer that question yes." Tr.Oral Arg. 51. Especially in light of this advice from the Solicitor General, I would not issue an invitation to the Senate to find an excuse, in the name of other pressing business, to be dismissive of its critical role in the impeachment process.

37

Practicalities aside, however, since the meaning of a constitutional provision
is at issue, my disagreement with the Court should be stated.

II

38

The majority states that the question raised in this case meets two of the
criteria for political questions set out in _Baker v. Carr,_ 369 U.S. 186, 82
S.Ct. 691, 7 L.Ed.2d 663 (1962). It concludes first that there is " 'a
textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate
political department.' " It also finds that the question cannot be resolved
for " 'a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards.' " _Ante,_
at ____.

39

Of course the issue in the political question doctrine is _not_ whether the
Constitutional text commits exclusive responsibility for a particular
governmental function to one of the political branches. There are numerous
instances of this sort of textual commitment, _e.g.,_ Art. I, § 8, and it is
not thought that disputes implicating these provisions are nonjusticiable.
Rather, the issue is whether the Constitution has given one of the political
branches final responsibility for interpreting the scope and nature of such a
power.

40

Although _Baker_ directs the Court to search for "a textually demonstrable
constitutional commitment" of such responsibility, there are few, if any,
explicit and unequivocal instances in the Constitution of this sort of textual
commitment. Conferral on Congress of the power to "Judge" qualifications of
its members by Art. I, § 5 may, for example, preclude judicial review of
whether a prospective member in fact meets those qualifications. See _Powell
v. McCormack,_ 395 U.S. 486, 548, 89 S.Ct. 1944, 1978, 23 L.Ed.2d 491 (1969).
The courts therefore are usually left to infer the presence of a political
question from the text and structure of the Constitution. In drawing the
inference that the Constitution has committed final interpretive authority to
one of the political branches, courts are sometimes aided by textual evidence
that the judiciary was not meant to exercise judicial review--a coordinate
inquiry expressed in _Baker_ 's "lack of judicially discoverable and
manageable standards" criterion. See, _e.g., Coleman v. Miller,_ 307 U.S. 433,
452-454, 59 S.Ct. 972, 981-982, 83 L.Ed. 1385 (1939), where the Court refused
to determine the life span of a proposed constitutional amendment given Art.
V's placement of the amendment process with Congress and the lack of any
judicial standard for resolving the question. See also _id.,_ at 457-460, 59
S.Ct., at 983-985 (Black, J., concurring).

A.

41

The majority finds a clear textual commitment in the Constitution's use of the
word "sole" in the phrase "the Senate shall have the sole Power to try all
impeachments." Art. I, § 3, cl. 6. It attributes "considerable significance"
to the fact that this term appears in only one other passage in the
Constitution. _Ante,_ at ____. See Art. I, § 2, cl. 5 (the House of
Representatives "shall have the sole Power of Impeachment"). The Framers'
sparing use of "sole" is thought to indicate that its employment in the
Impeachment Trial Clause demonstrates a concern to give the Senate exclusive
interpretive authority over the Clause.

42

In disagreeing with the Court, I note that the Solicitor General stated at
oral argument that "[w]e don't rest our submission on sole power to try."
Tr.Oral Arg. 32; see also _id.,_ at 51. The Government was well advised in
this respect. The significance of the Constitution's use of the term "sole"
lies not in the infrequency with which the term appears, but in the fact that
it appears exactly twice, in parallel provisions concerning impeachment. That
the word "sole" is found only in the House and Senate Impeachment Clauses
demonstrates that its purpose is to emphasize the distinct role of each in the
impeachment process. As the majority notes, the Framers, following English
practice, were very much concerned to separate the prosecutorial from the
adjudicative aspects of impeachment. _Ante,_ at ____ (citing The Federalist
No. 66, p. 446 (J. Cooke ed. 1961)). Giving each House "sole" power with
respect to its role in impeachments effected this division of labor. While the
majority is thus right to interpret the term "sole" to indicate that the
Senate ought to " 'functio[n] independently and without assistance or
interference,' " _ante,_ at ____, it wrongly identifies the judiciary, rather
than the House, as the source of potential interference with which the Framers
were concerned when they employed the term "sole."

43

Even if the Impeachment Trial Clause is read without regard to its companion
clause, the Court's willingness to abandon its obligation to review the
constitutionality of legislative acts merely on the strength of the word
"sole" is perplexing. Consider, by comparison, the treatment of Art. I, § 1,
which grants "All legislative powers" to the House and Senate. As used in that
context "all" is nearly synonymous with "sole"--both connote entire and
exclusive authority. Yet the Court has never thought it would unduly interfere
with the operation of the Legislative Branch to entertain difficult and
important questions as to the extent of the legislative power. Quite the
opposite, we have stated that the proper interpretation of the Clause falls
within the province of the judiciary. Addressing the constitutionality of the
legislative veto, for example, the Court found it necessary and proper to
interpret Art. I, § 1 as one of the "[e]xplicit and unambiguous provisions of
the Constitution [that] prescribe and define the respective functions of the
Congress and of the Executive in the legislative process." _INS v. Chadha,_
462 U.S. 919, 945, 103 S.Ct. 2764, 2781, 77 L.Ed.2d 317 (1983).

44

The majority also claims support in the history and early interpretations of
the Impeachment Clauses, noting the various arguments in support of the
current system made at the Constitutional Convention and expressed powerfully
by Hamilton in The Federalist Nos. 65 and 66. In light of these materials
there can be little doubt that the Framers came to the view at the Convention
that the trial of officials' public misdeeds should be conducted by
representatives of the people; that the fledgling judiciary lacked the
wherewithal to adjudicate political intrigues; that the judiciary ought not to
try both impeachments and subsequent criminal cases emanating from them; and
that the impeachment power must reside in the Legislative Branch to provide a
check on the largely unaccountable judiciary.

45

The majority's review of the historical record thus explains why the power to
try impeachments properly resides with the Senate. It does not explain,
however, the sweeping statement that the judiciary was "not chosen to have any
role in impeachments."1 _Ante,_ at ____. Not a single word in the historical
materials cited by the majority addresses judicial review of the Impeachment
Trial Clause. And a glance at the arguments surrounding the Impeachment
Clauses negates the majority's attempt to infer nonjusticiability from the
Framers' arguments in support of the Senate's power to try impeachments.

46

What the relevant history mainly reveals is deep ambivalence among many of the
Framers over the very institution of impeachment, which, by its nature, is not
easily reconciled with our system of checks and balances. As they clearly
recognized, the branch of the Federal Government which is possessed of the
authority to try impeachments, by having final say over the membership of each
branch, holds a potentially unanswerable power over the others. In addition,
that branch, insofar as it is called upon to try not only members of other
branches, but also its own, will have the advantage of being the judge of its
own members' causes.

47

It is no surprise, then, that the question of impeachment greatly vexed the
Framers. The pages of the Convention debates reveal diverse plans for
resolving this exceedingly difficult issue. See P. Hoffer & N. Hull,
Impeachment in America, 1635-1805, pp. 97-106 (1984) (discussing various
proposals). Both before and during the convention, Madison maintained that the
judiciary ought to try impeachments. _Id.,_ at 74, 98, 100. Shortly
thereafter, however, he devised a quite complicated scheme that involved the
participation of each branch. _Id.,_ at 74-75. Jefferson likewise had
attempted to develop an interbranch system for impeachment trials in Virginia.
_Id.,_ at 71-72. Even Hamilton's eloquent defense of the scheme adopted by the
Constitution was based on a pragmatic decision to further the cause of
ratification rather than a strong belief in the superiority of a scheme
vesting the Senate with the sole power to try impeachments. While at the
Convention, Hamilton advocated that impeachment trials be conducted by a court
made up of state court judges. 1 Records of the Federal Convention of 1787,
pp. 292-293 (M. Farrand ed. 1966). Four months after publishing the Federalist
Nos. 65 and 66, however, he urged the New York Ratifying Convention to amend
the Clause he had so ably defended to have the Senate, the Supreme Court, and
judges from each state jointly try impeachments. 5 The Papers of Alexander
Hamilton 167-168 (H. Syrett ed. 1962).

48

The historical evidence reveals above all else that the Framers were deeply
concerned about placing in any branch the "awful discretion, which a court of
impeachments must necessarily have." The Federalist No. 65, p. 441 (J. Cooke
ed. 1961). Viewed against this history, the discord between the majority's
position and the basic principles of checks and balances underlying the
Constitution's separation of powers is clear. In essence, the majority
suggests that the Framers' conferred upon Congress a potential tool of
legislative dominance yet at the same time rendered Congress' exercise of that
power one of the very few areas of legislative authority immune from any
judicial review. While the majority rejects petitioner's justiciability
argument as espousing a view "inconsistent with the Framers' insistence that
our system be one of checks and balances," _ante,_ at ____, it is the Court's
finding of nonjusticiability that truly upsets the Framers' careful design. In
a truly balanced system, impeachments tried by the Senate would serve as a
means of controlling the largely unaccountable judiciary, even as judicial
review would ensure that the Senate adhered to a minimal set of procedural
standards in conducting impeachment trials.

B

49

The majority also contends that the term "try" does not present a judicially
manageable standard. It notes that in 1787, as today, the word "try" may refer
to an inquiry in the nature of a judicial proceeding, or, more generally, to
experimentation or investigation. In light of the term's multiple senses, the
Court finds itself unable to conclude that the Framers used the word "try" as
"an implied limitation on the method by which the Senate might proceed in
trying impeachments." _Ante,_ at ____. Also according to the majority,
comparison to the other more specific requirements listed in the Impeachment
Trial Clause--that the senators must proceed under oath and vote by two-thirds
to convict, and that the Chief Justice must preside over an impeachment trial
of the President--indicates that the word "try" was not meant by the Framers
to constitute a limitation on the Senate's conduct and further reveals the
term's unmanageability.

50

It is apparently on this basis that the majority distinguishes _Powell v.
McCormack,_ 395 U.S. 486, 89 S.Ct. 1944, 23 L.Ed.2d 491 (1969). In _Powell,_
the House of Representatives argued that the grant to Congress of the power to
"Judge" the qualifications of its members in Art. I, § 5 precluded the Court
from reviewing the House's decision that Powell was not fit for membership. We
held to the contrary, noting that, although the Constitution leaves the power
to "Judge" in the hands of Congress, it also enumerates, in Art. I, § 2, the
"qualifications" whose presence or absence Congress must adjudge. It is
precisely the business of the courts, we concluded, to determine the nature
and extent of these constitutionally-specified qualifications. _Id.,_ at 522,
89 S.Ct., at 1964. The majority finds this case different from _Powell_ only
on the grounds that, whereas the qualifications of Art. I, § 2 are readily
susceptible to judicial interpretation, the term "try" does not provide an
"identifiable textual limit on the authority which is committed to the
Senate." _Ante,_ at ____.

51

This argument comes in two variants. The first, which asserts that one simply
cannot ascertain the sense of "try" which the Framers employed and hence
cannot undertake judicial review, is clearly untenable. To begin with, one
would intuitively expect that, in defining the power of a political body to
conduct an inquiry into official wrongdoing, the Framers used "try" in its
legal sense. That intuition is borne out by reflection on the alternatives.
The third clause of Art. I, § 3 cannot seriously be read to mean that the
Senate shall "attempt" or "experiment with" impeachments. It is equally
implausible to say that the Senate is charged with "investigating"
impeachments given that this description would substantially overlap with the
House of Representatives' "sole" power to draw up articles of impeachment.
Art. I, § 2, cl. 5. That these alternatives are not realistic possibilities is
finally evidenced by the use of "tried" in the third sentence of the
Impeachment Trial Clause ("[w]hen the President of the United States is tried
. . ."), and by Art. III, § 2, cl. 3 ("[t]he Trial of all Crimes, except in
Cases of Impeachment . . .").

52

The other variant of the majority position focuses not on which sense of "try"
is employed in the Impeachment Trial Clause, but on whether the legal sense of
that term creates a judicially manageable standard. The majority concludes
that the term provides no "identifiable textual limit." Yet, as the Government
itself conceded at oral argument, the term "try" is hardly so elusive as the
majority would have it. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 51-52. Were the Senate, for
example, to adopt the practice of automatically entering a judgment of
conviction whenever articles of impeachment were delivered from the House, it
is quite clear that the Senate will have failed to "try" impeachments.2 See,
_id.,_ at 52. Indeed in this respect, "try" presents no greater, and perhaps
fewer, interpretive difficulties than some other constitutional standards that
have been found amenable to familiar techniques of judicial construction,
including, for example, "Commerce . . . among the several States," Art. I, §
8, cl. 3, and "due process of law." Amdt. 5; see _Gibbons v. Ogden,_ 9 Wheat.
1, 189, 6 L.Ed. 23 (1824) ("The subject to be regulated is commerce; and our
constitution being . . . one of enumeration, and not of definition, to
ascertain the extent of the power, it becomes necessary to settle the meaning
of the word"); _Mathews v. Eldridge,_ 424 U.S. 319, 334, 96 S.Ct. 893, 902, 47
L.Ed.2d 18 (1976) (" ' "[D]ue process," unlike some legal rules, is not a
technical conception with a fixed content unrelated to time, place and
circumstances' ") (quoting _Cafeteria Workers v. McElroy,_ 367 U.S. 886, 895,
81 S.Ct. 1743, 1748, 6 L.Ed.2d 1230 (1961)).3

III

53

The majority's conclusion that "try" is incapable of meaningful judicial
construction is not without irony. One might think that if any class of
concepts would fall within the definitional abilities of the judiciary, it
would be that class having to do with procedural justice. Examination of the
remaining question--whether proceedings in accordance with Senate Rule XI are
compatible with the Impeachment Trial Clause--confirms this intuition.

54

Petitioner bears the rather substantial burden of demonstrating that, simply
by employing the word "try," the Constitution prohibits the Senate from
relying on a fact-finding committee. It is clear that the Framers were
familiar with English impeachment practice and with that of the States
employing a variant of the English model at the time of the Constitutional
Convention. Hence there is little doubt that the term "try" as used in Art. I,
§ 3, cl. 6 meant that the Senate should conduct its proceedings in a manner
somewhat resembling a judicial proceeding. Indeed, it is safe to assume that
Senate trials were to follow the practice in England and the States, which
contemplated a formal hearing on the charges, at which the accused would be
represented by counsel, evidence would be presented, and the accused would
have the opportunity to be heard.

55

Petitioner argues, however, that because committees were not used in state
impeachment trials prior to the Convention, the word "try" cannot be
interpreted to permit their use. It is, however, a substantial leap to infer
from the absence of a particular device of parliamentary procedure that its
use has been forever barred by the Constitution. And there is textual and
historical evidence that undermines the inference sought to be drawn in this
case.

56

The fact that Art. III, § 2, cl. 3 specifically exempts impeachment trials
from the jury requirement provides some evidence that the Framers were anxious
not to have additional specific procedural requirements read into the term
"try." Contemporaneous commentary further supports this view. Hamilton, for
example, stressed that a trial by so large a body as the Senate (which at the
time promised to boast 26 members) necessitated that the proceedings not "be
tied down to . . . strict rules, either in the delineation of the offence by
the prosecutors, or in the construction of it by the Judges. . . ." The
Federalist No. 65, p. 441 (J. Cooke ed. 1961). In his extensive analysis of
the Impeachment Trial Clause, Justice Story offered a nearly identical
analysis, which is worth quoting at length.

57

"[I]t is obvious, that the strictness of the forms of proceeding in cases of
offences at common law is ill adapted to impeachments. The very habits growing
out of judicial employments; the rigid manner, in which the discretion of
judges is limited, and fenced in on all sides, in order to protect persons
accused of crimes by rules and precedents; and the adherence to technical
principles, which, perhaps, distinguishes this branch of the law, more than
any other, are all ill adapted to the trial of political offences, in the
broad course of impeachments. And it has been observed with great propriety,
that a tribunal of a liberal and comprehensive character, confined, as little
as possible, to strict forms, enabled to continue its session as long as the
nature of the law may require, qualified to view the charge in all its
bearings and dependencies, and to appropriate on sound principles of public
policy the defence of the accused, seems indispensable to the value of the
trial. The history of impeachments, both in England and America, justifies the
remark. There is little technical in the mode of proceeding; the charges are
sufficiently clear, and yet in a general form; there are few exceptions, which
arise in the application of the evidence, which grow out of mere technical
rules and quibbles. And it has repeatedly been seen, that the functions have
been better understood, and more liberally and justly expounded by statesmen,
then by mere lawyers." 1 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the
United States § 765, p. 532 (3d ed. 1858).

58

It is also noteworthy that the delegation of fact-finding by judicial and
quasi-judicial bodies was hardly unknown to the Framers. Jefferson, at least,
was aware that the House of Lords sometimes delegated fact-finding in
impeachment trials to committees and recommended use of the same to the
Senate. T. Jefferson, A Manual of Parliamentary Practice for the Use of the
Senate of the United States § LIII (2d ed. 1812) ("The practice is to swear
the witnesses in open House, and then examine them there: or a committee may
be named, who shall examine them in committee . . ."), reprinted in
Jefferson's Parliamentary Writings, The Papers of Thomas Jefferson, Second
Series 424 (W. Howell ed. 1988). The States also had on occasion employed
legislative committees to investigate whether to draw up articles of
impeachment. See Hoffer & Hull, at 29, 33. More generally, in colonial
governments and state legislatures, contemnors appeared before committees to
answer the charges against them. See _Groppi v. Leslie,_ 404 U.S. 496, 501, 92
S.Ct. 582, 585, 30 L.Ed.2d 632 (1972). Federal courts likewise had appointed
special masters and other fact finders "[f]rom the commencement of our
Government." _Ex parte Peterson,_ 253 U.S. 300, 312, 40 S.Ct. 543, 547, 64
L.Ed. 919 (1920). Particularly in light of the Constitution's grant to each
House of the power to "determine the Rules of its Proceedings," see Art. I, §
5, cl. 2, the existence of legislative and judicial delegation strongly
suggests that the Impeachment Trial Clause was not designed to prevent
employment of a factfinding committee.

59

In short, textual and historical evidence reveals that the Impeachment Trial
Clause was not meant to bind the hands of the Senate beyond establishing a set
of minimal procedures. Without identifying the exact contours of these
procedures, it is sufficient to say that the Senate's use of a factfinding
committee under Rule XI is entirely compatible with the Constitution's command
that the Senate "try all impeachments." Petitioner's challenge to his
conviction must therefore fail.

IV

60

Petitioner has not asked the Court to conduct his impeachment trial; he has
asked instead that it determine whether his impeachment was tried by the
Senate. The majority refuses to reach this determination out of a laudable
desire to respect the authority of the legislature. Regrettably, this concern
is manifested in a manner that does needless violence to the Constitution.4
The deference that is owed can be found in the Constitution itself, which
provides the Senate ample discretion to determine how best to try
impeachments.

61

Justice SOUTER, concurring in the judgment.

62

I agree with the Court that this case presents a nonjusticiable political
question. Because my analysis differs somewhat from the Court's, however, I
concur in its judgment by this separate opinion.

63

As we cautioned in _Baker v. Carr,_ 369 U.S. 186, 210-211, 82 S.Ct. 691,
706-707, 7 L.Ed.2d 663 (1962), "the 'political question' label" tends "to
obscure the need for case-by-case inquiry." The need for such close
examination is nevertheless clear from our precedents, which demonstrate that
the functional nature of the political question doctrine requires analysis of
"the precise facts and posture of the particular case," and precludes
"resolution by any semantic cataloguing," _id.,_ at 217, 82 S.Ct., at 710:

64

"Prominent on the surface of any case held to involve a political question is
found a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a
coordinate political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable and
manageable standards for resolving it; or the impossibility of deciding
without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for nonjudicial
discretion; or the impossibility of a court's undertaking independent
resolution without expressing lack of the respect due coordinate branches of
government; or an unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political
decision already made; or the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious
pronouncements by various departments on one question." _Ibid._

65

Whatever considerations feature most prominently in a particular case, the
political question doctrine is "essentially a function of the separation of
powers," _ibid.,_ existing to restrain courts "from inappropriate interference
in the business of the other branches of Government," _United States v. Munoz-
Flores,_ 495 U.S. 385, 394, 110 S.Ct. 1964, 1970, 109 L.Ed.2d 384 (1990), and
deriving in large part from prudential concerns about the respect we owe the
political departments. See _Goldwater v. Carter,_ 444 U.S. 996, 1000, 100
S.Ct. 533, 535, 62 L.Ed.2d 428 (1979) (Powell, J., concurring in judgment); A.
Bickel, The Least Dangerous Branch 125-126 (2d ed. 1986); Finkelstein,
Judicial Self-Limitation, 37 Harv.L.Rev. 338, 344-345 (1924). Not all
interference is inappropriate or disrespectful, however, and application of
the doctrine ultimately turns, as Learned Hand put it, on "how importunately
the occasion demands an answer." L. Hand, The Bill of Rights 15 (1958).

66

This occasion does not demand an answer. The Impeachment Trial Clause commits
to the Senate "the sole Power to try all Impeachments," subject to three
procedural requirements: the Senate shall be on oath or affirmation; the Chief
Justice shall preside when the President is tried; and conviction shall be
upon the concurrence of two-thirds of the Members present. U.S. Const., Art.
I, § 3, cl. 6. It seems fair to conclude that the Clause contemplates that the
Senate may determine, within broad boundaries, such subsidiary issues as the
procedures for receipt and consideration of evidence necessary to satisfy its
duty to "try" impeachments. Other significant considerations confirm a
conclusion that this case presents a nonjusticiable political question: the
"unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political decision already
made," as well as "the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious
pronouncements by various departments on one question." _Baker, supra,_ 369
U.S., at 217, 82 S.Ct., at 710. As the Court observes, see _ante,_ at ____,
judicial review of an impeachment trial would under the best of circumstances
entail significant disruption of government.

67

One can, nevertheless, envision different and unusual circumstances that might
justify a more searching review of impeachment proceedings. If the Senate were
to act in a manner seriously threatening the integrity of its results,
convicting, say, upon a coin-toss, or upon a summary determination that an
officer of the United States was simply " 'a bad guy,' " _ante,_ at ____
(WHITE, J., concurring in judgment), judicial interference might well be
appropriate. In such circumstances, the Senate's action might be so far beyond
the scope of its constitutional authority, and the consequent impact on the
Republic so great, as to merit a judicial response despite the prudential
concerns that would ordinarily counsel silence. "The political question
doctrine, a tool for maintenance of governmental order, will not be so applied
as to promote only disorder." _Baker, supra,_ at 215, 82 S.Ct., at 709.

*

The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. See
_United States v. Detroit Lumber Co.,_ 200 U.S. 321, 337, 26 S.Ct. 282, 287,
50 L.Ed. 499.

1

Specifically, Rule XI provides:

"[I]n the trial of any impeachment the Presiding Officer of the Senate, if the
Senate so orders, shall appoint a committee of Senators to receive evidence
and take testimony at such times and places as the committee may determine,
and for such purpose the committee so appointed and the chairman thereof, to
be elected by the committee, shall (unless otherwise ordered by the Senate)
exercise all the powers and functions conferred upon the Senate and the
Presiding Officer of the Senate, respectively, under the rules of procedure
and practice in the Senate when sitting on impeachment trials.

"Unless otherwise ordered by the Senate, the rules of procedure and practice
in the Senate when sitting on impeachment trials shall govern the procedure
and practice of the committee so appointed. The committee so appointed shall
report to the Senate in writing a certified copy of the transcript of the
proceedings and testimony had and given before such committee, and such report
shall be received by the Senate and the evidence so received and the testimony
so taken shall be considered to all intents and purposes, subject to the right
of the Senate to determine competency, relevancy, and materiality, as having
been received and taken before the Senate, but nothing herein shall prevent
the Senate from sending for any witness and hearing his testimony in open
Senate, or by order of the Senate having the entire trial in open Senate."

2

Nixon contends that justiciability should not hang on the mere fact that the
Judiciary's interest may be implicated or affected by the legislative action
in question. In support, he cites our decisions in _Mistretta v. United
States,_ 488 U.S. 361, 109 S.Ct. 647, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 (1989) and _Morrison v.
Olson,_ 487 U.S. 654, 108 S.Ct. 2597, 101 L.Ed.2d 569 (1988). These cases do
not advance his argument, however, since neither addressed the issue of
justiciability. More importantly, neither case involved a situation in which
judicial review would remove the only check placed on the Judicial Branch by
the Framers.

1

This latter contention is belied by the Impeachment Trial Clause itself, which
designates the Chief Justice to preside over impeachment trials of the
President.

2

It is not a sufficient rejoinder to this example to say, with one of the Court
of Appeals judges below, that it postulates a "monstrous hypothetical abuse."
See 290 U.S.App.D.C. 420, 427, 938 F.2d 239, 246 (1991). The unlikelihood of
the example being realized does not undermine the point that "try" has a
definable meaning and thus ought to be regarded as judicially manageable.

3

The majority's _in terrorem_ argument against justiciability that judicial
review of impeachments might cause national disruption and that the courts
would be unable to fashion effective relief--merits only brief attention. In
the typical instance, court review of impeachments would no more render the
political system dysfunctional than has this litigation. Moreover, the same
capacity for disruption was noted and rejected as a basis for not hearing
_Powell. Powell v. McCormack,_ 395 U.S. 486, 549, 89 S.Ct. 1944, 1978, 23
L.Ed.2d 491 (1969). The relief granted for unconstitutional impeachment trials
would presumably be similar to the relief granted to other unfairly tried
public employee-litigants. Finally, as applied to the special case of the
President, the majority's argument merely points out that, were the Senate to
convict the President without any kind of a trial, a constitutional crisis
might well result. It hardly follows that the Court ought to refrain from
upholding the Constitution in all impeachment cases. Nor does it follow that,
in cases of Presidential impeachment, the Justices ought to abandon their
Constitutional responsibilities because the Senate has precipitated a crisis.

4

Although our views might well produce identical results in most cases, the
same objection may be raised against the prudential version of political
question doctrine presented by Justice SOUTER. According to the prudential
view, judicial determination of whether the Senate has conducted an
impeachment trial would interfere unacceptably with the Senate's work and
should be avoided except where necessitated by the threat of grave harm to the
constitutional order. As articulated, this position is missing its premise: no
explanation is offered as to why it would show disrespect or cause disruption
or embarrassment to review the action of the Senate in this case as opposed
to, say, the enactment of legislation under the Commerce Clause. The
Constitution requires the courts to determine the validity of statutes passed
by Congress when they are challenged, even though such laws are passed with
the firm belief that they are constitutional. The exercise of judicial review
of this kind, with all of its attendant risk of interference and disrespect,
is not conditioned upon a showing in each case that without it the Republic
would be at risk. Some account is therefore needed as to why prudence does not
counsel against judicial review in the typical case, yet does so in this case.

In any event, the prudential view cannot achieve its stated purpose. The
judgment it wishes to avoid--and the attendant disrespect and embarrassment--
will inevitably be cast because the courts still will be required to
distinguish cases on their merits. Justice SOUTER states that the Court ought
not to entertain petitioner's constitutional claim because "[i]t seems fair to
conclude," _post,_ at ____, that the Senate tried him. In other words, on the
basis of a preliminary determination that the Senate has acted within the
"broad boundaries" of the Impeachment Trial Clause, it is concluded that we
must refrain from making that determination. At best, this approach offers
only the illusion of deference and respect by substituting impressionistic
assessment for constitutional analysis.

