301 U.S. 1

57 S.Ct. 615

81 L.Ed. 893

NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD  
v.  
JONES & LAUGHLIN STEEL CORPORATION.

No. 419.

Argued Feb. 10, 11, 1937.

Decided April 12, 1937.

[Syllabus from pages 1-5 intentionally omitted]

Messrs. Homer S. Cummings, Atty. Gen., and Stanley F. Reed, Sol. Gen., and J.
Warren Madden, both of Washington, D.C., for petitioner.

Mr. Earl F. Reed, of Pittsburgh, Pa., for respondent.

[Argument of Counsel from pages 5-22 intentionally omitted]

Mr. Chief Justice HUGHES delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

In a proceeding under the National Labor Relations Act of 19351 the National
Labor Relations Board found that the respondent, Jones & Laughlin Steel
Corporation, had violated the act by engaging in unfair labor practices
affecting commerce. The proceeding was instituted by the Beaver Valley Lodge
No. 200, affiliated with the Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel and Tin
Workers of America, a labor organization. The unfair labor practices charged
were that the corporation was discriminating against members of the union with
regard to hire and tenure of employment, and was coercing and intimidating its
enployees in order to interfere with their self-organization. The
discriminatory and coercive action alleged was the discharge of certain
employees.

2

The National Labor Relations Board, sustaining the charge, ordered the
corporation to cease and desist from such discrimination and coercion, to
offer reinstatement to ten of the employees named, to make good their losses
in pay, and to post for thirty days notices that the corporation would not
discharge or discriminate against members, or those desiring to become
members, of the labor union. As the corporation failed to comply, the Board
petitioned the Circuit Court of Appeals to enforce the order. The court denied
the petition holding that the order lay beyond the range of federal power. 83
F.(2d) 998. We granted certiorari. 299 U.S. 534, 57 S.Ct. 119, 81 L.Ed. ---.

3

The scheme of the National Labor Relations Act--which is too long to be quoted
in full--may be briefly stated. The first section (29 U.S.C.A. § 151) sets
forth findings with respect to the injury to commerce resulting from the
denial by employers of the right of employees to organize and from the refusal
of employers to accept the procedure of collective bargaining. There follows a
declaration that it is the policy of the United States to eliminate these
causes of obstruction to the free flow of commerce.2 The act then defines the
terms it uses, including the terms 'commerce' and 'affecting commerce.'
Section 2 (29 U.S.C.A. § 152). It creates the National Labor Relations Board
and prescribes its organization. Sections 3--6 (29 U.S.C.A. §§ 153--156). It
sets forth the right of employees to self-organization and to bargain
collectively through representatives of their own choosing. Section 7 (29
U.S.C.A. § 157). It defines 'unfair labor practices.' Section 8 (29 U.S.C.A. §
158). It lays down rules as to the representation of employees for the purpose
of collective bargaining. Section 9 (29 U.S.C.A. § 159). The Board is
empowered to prevent the described unfair labor practices affecting commerce
and the act prescribes the procedure to that end. The Board is authorized to
petition designated courts to secure the enforcement of its order. The
findings of the Board as to the facts, if supported by evidence, are to be
conclusive. If either party on application to the court shows that additional
evidence is material and that there were reasonable grounds for the failure to
adduce such evidence in the hearings before the Board, the court may order the
additional evidence to be taken. Any person aggrieved by a final order of the
Board may obtain a review in the designated courts with the same procedure as
in the case of an application by the Board for the enforcement of its order.
Section 10 (29 U.S.C.A. § 160). The Board has broad powers of investigation.
Section 11 (29 U.S.C.A. § 161). Interference with members of the Board or its
agents in the performance of their duties is punishable by fine and
imprisonment. Section 12 (29 U.S.C.A. § 162). Nothing in the act is to be
construed to interfere with the right to strike. Section 13 (29 U.S.C.A. §
163). There is a separability clause to the effect that, if any provision of
the act or its application to any person or circumstances shall be held
invalid, the remainder of the act or its application to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected. Section 15 (29 U.S.C.A. § 165). The
particular provisions which are involved in the instant case will be
considered more in detail in the course of the discussion.

4

The procedure in the instant case followed the statute. The labor union filed
with the Board its verified charge. The Board thereupon issued its complaint
against the respondent, alleging that its action in discharging the employees
in question constituted unfair labor practices affecting commerce within the
meaning of section 8, subdivisions (1) and (3), and section 2, subdivisions
(6) and (7), of the act. Respondent, appearing specially for the purpose of
objecting to the jurisdiction of the Board, filed its answer. Respondent
admitted the discharges, but alleged that they were made because of
inefficiency or violation of rules or for other good reasons and were not
ascribable to union membership or activities. As an affirmative defense
respondent challenged the constitutional validity of the statute and its
applicability in the instant case. Notice of hearing was given and respondent
appeared by counsel. The Board first took up the issue of jurisdiction and
evidence was presented by both the Board and the respondent. Respondent then
moved to dismiss the complaint for lack of jurisdiction and, on denial of that
motion, respondent in accordance with its special appearance withdrew from
further participation in the hearing. The Board received evidence upon the
merits and at its close made its findings and order.

5

Contesting the ruling of the Board, the respondent argues (1) that the act is
in reality a regulation of labor relations and not of interstate commerce; (2)
that the act can have no application to the respondent's relations with its
production employees because they are not subject to regulation by the federal
government; and (3) that the provisions of the act violate section 2 of
article 3 and the Fifth and Seventh Amendments of the Constitution of the
United States.

6

The facts as to the nature and scope of the business of the Jones & Laughlin
Steel Corporation have been found by the Labor Board, and, so far as they are
essential to the determination of this controversy, they are not in dispute.
The Labor Board has found: The corporation is organized under the laws of
Pennsylvania and has its principal office at Pittsburgh. It is engaged in the
business of manufacturing iron and steel in plants situated in Pittsburgh and
nearby Aliquippa, Pa. It manufactures and distributes a widely diversified
line of steel and pig iron, being the fourth largest producer of steel in the
United States. With its subsidiaries nineteen in number--it is a completely
integrated enterprise, owning and operating ore, coal and limestone
properties, lake and river transportation facilities and terminal railroads
located at its manufacturing plants. It owns or controls mines in Michigan and
Minnesota. It operates four ore steamships on the Great Lakes, used in the
transportation of ore to its factories. It owns coal mines in Pennsylvania. It
operates towboats and steam barges used in carrying coal to its factories. It
owns limestone properties in various places in Pennsylvania and West Virginia.
It owns the Monongahela connecting railroad which connects the plants of the
Pittsburgh works and forms an interconnection with the Pennsylvania, New York
Central and Baltimore & Ohio Railroad systems. It owns the Aliquippa &
Southern Railroad Company, which connects the Aliquippa works with the
Pittsburgh & Lake Erie, part of the New York Central system. Much of its
product is shipped to its warehouses in Chicago, Detroit, Cincinnati and
Memphis,--to the last two places by means of its own barges and transportation
equipment. In Long Island City, New York, and in New Orleans it operates
structural steel fabricating shops in connection with the warehousing of
semifinished materials sent from its works. Through one of its wholly-owned
subsidiaries it owns, leases, and operates stores, warehouses, and yards for
the distribution of equipment and supplies for drilling and operating oil and
gas wells and for pipe lines, refineries and pumping stations. It has sales
offices in twenty cities in the United States and a wholly-owned subsidiary
which is devoted exclusively to distributing its product in Canada.
Approximately 75 per cent. of its product is shipped out of Pennsylvania.

7

Summarizing these operations, the Labor Board concluded that the works in
Pittsburgh and Aliquippa 'might be likened to the heart of a self-contained,
highly integrated body. They draw in the raw materials from Michigan,
Minnesota, West Virginia, Pennsylvania in part through arteries and by means
controlled by the respondent; they transform the materials and then pump them
out to all parts of the nation through the vast mechanism which the respondent
has elaborated.'

8

To carry on the activities of the entire steel industry, 33,000 men mine ore,
44,000 men mine coal, 4,000 men quarry limestone, 16,000 men manufacture coke,
343,000 men manufacture steel, and 83,000 men transport its product.
Respondent has about 10,000 employees in its Aliquippa plant, which is located
in a community of about 30,000 persons.

9

Respondent points to evidence that the Aliquippa plant, in which the
discharged, men were employed, contains complete facilities for the production
of finished and semifinished iron and steel products from raw materials; that
its works consist primarily of a by-product coke plant for the production of
coke; blast furnaces for the production of pig iron; open hearth furnaces and
Bessemer converters for the production of steel; blooming mills for the
reduction of steel ingots into smaller shapes; and a number of finishing mills
such as structural mills, rod mills, wire mills, and the like. In addition,
there are other buildings, structures and equipment, storage yards, docks and
an intraplant storage system. Respondent's operations at these works are
carried on in two distinct stages, the first being the conversion of raw
materials into pig iron and the second being the manufacture of semifinished
and finished iron and steel products; and in both cases the operations result
in substantially changing the character, utility and value of the materials
wrought upon, which is apparent from the nature and extent of the processes to
which they are subjected and which respondent fully describes. Respondent also
directs attention to the fact that the iron ore which is procured from mines
in Minnesota and Michigan and transported to respondent's plant is stored in
stock piles for future use, the amount of ore in storage varying with the
season but usually being enough to maintain operations from nine to ten
months; that the coal which is procured from the mines of a subsidiary located
in Pennsylvania and taken to the plant at Aliquippa is there, like ore, stored
for future use, approximately two to three months' supply of coal being always
on hand; and that the limestone which is obtained in Pennsylvania and West
Virginia is also stored in amounts usually adequate to run the blast furnaces
for a few weeks. Various details of operation, transportation, and
distribution are also mentioned which for the present purpose it is not
necessary to detail.

10

Practically all the factual evidence in the case, except that which dealt with
the nature of respondent's business, concerned its relations with the
employees in the Aliquippa plant whose discharge was the subject of the
complaint. These employees were active leaders in the labor union. Several
were officers and others were leaders of particular groups. Two of the
employees were motor inspectors; one was a tractor driver; three were crane
operators; one was a washer in the coke plant; and three were laborers. Three
other employees were mentioned in the complaint but it was withdrawn as to one
of them and no evidence was heard on the action taken with respect to the
other two.

11

While respondent criticizes the evidence and the attitude of the Board, which
is described as being hostile toward employers and particularly toward those
who insisted upon their constitutional rights, respondent did not take
advantage of its opportunity to present evidence to refute that which was
offered to show discrimination and coercion. In this situation, the record
presents no ground for setting aside the order of the Board so far as the
facts pertaining to the circumstances and purpose of the discharge of the
employees are concerned. Upon that point it is sufficient to say that the
evidence supports the findings of the Board that respondent discharged these
men 'because of their union activity and for the purpose of discouraging
membership in the union.' We turn to the questions of law which respondent
urges in contesting the validity and application of the act.

12

First. The Scope of the Act.--The act is challenged in its entirety as an
attempt to regulate all industry, thus invading the reserved powers of the
States over their local concerns. It is asserted that the references in the
act to interstate and foreign commerce are colorable at best; that the act is
not a true regulation of such commerce or of matters which directly affect it,
but on the contrary has the fundamental object of placing under the compulsory
supervision of the federal government all industrial labor relations within
the nation. The argument seeks support in the broad words of the preamble
(section 13) and in the sweep of the provisions of the act, and it is further
insisted that its legislative history shows an essential universal purpose in
the light of which its scope cannot be limited by either construction or by
the application of the separability clause.

13

If this conception of terms, intent and consequent inseparability were sound,
the act would necessarily fall by reason of the limitation upon the federal
power which inheres in the constitutional grant, as well as because of the
explicit reservation of the Tenth Amendment. Schechter Corporation v. United
States, 295 U.S. 495, 549, 550, 554, 55 S.Ct. 837, 851, 853, 79 L.Ed. 1570, 97
A.L.R. 947. The authority of the federal government may not be pushed to such
an extreme as to destroy the distinction, which the commerce clause itself
establishes, between commerce 'among the several States' and the internal
concerns of a state. That distinction between what is national and what is
local in the activities of commerce is vital to the maintenance of our federal
system. Id.

14

But we are not at liberty to deny effect to specific provisions, which
Congress has constitutional power to enact, by superimposing upon them
inferences from general legislative declarations of an ambiguous character,
even if found in the same statute. The cardinal principle of statutory
construction is to save and not to destroy. We have repeatedly held that as
between two possible interpretations of a statute, by one of which it would be
unconstitutional and by the other valid, our plain duty is to adopt that which
will save the act. Even to avoid a serious doubt the rule is the same. Federal
Trade Commission v. American Tobacco Co., 264 U.S. 298, 307, 44 S.Ct. 336,
337, 68 L.Ed. 696, 32 A.L.R. 786; Panama R.R. Co. v. Johnson, 264 U.S. 375,
390, 44 S.Ct. 391, 395, 68 L.Ed. 748; Missouri Pacific R.R. Co., v. Boone, 270
U.S. 466, 472, 46 S.Ct. 341, 343, 70 L.Ed. 688; Blodgett v. Holden, 275 U.S.
142, 148, 276 U.S. 594, 48 S.Ct. 105, 107, 72 L.Ed. 206; Richmond Screw Anchor
Co. v. United States, 275 U.S. 331, 346, 48 S.Ct. 194, 198, 72 L.Ed. 303.

15

We think it clear that the National Labor Relations Act may be construed so as
to operate within the sphere of constitutional authority. The jurisdiction
conferred upon the Board, and invoked in this instance, is found in section
10(a), 29 U.S.C.A. § 160(a), which provides:

16

'Sec. 10(a). The Board is empowered, as hereinafter provided, to prevent any
person from engaging in any unfair labor practice (listed in section 8
(section 158)) affecting commerce.' The critical words of this provision,
prescribing the limits of the Board's authority in dealing with the labor
practices, are 'affecting commerce.' The act specifically defines the
'commerce' to which it refers (section 2(6), 29 U.S.C.A. § 152(6):

17

'The term 'commerce' means trade, traffic, commerce, transportation, or
communication among the several States, or between the District of Columbia or
any Territory of the United States and any State or other Territory, or
between any foreign country and any State, Territory, or the District of
Columbia, or within the District of Columbia or any Territory, or between
points in the same State but through any other State or any Territory or the
District of Columbia or any foreign country.'

18

There can be no question that the commerce thus contemplated by the act (aside
from that within a Territory or the District of Columbia) is interstate and
foreign commerce in the constitutional sense. The act also defines the term
'affecting commerce' section 2(7), 29 U.S.C.A. § 152(7):

19

'The term 'affecting commerce' means in commerce, or burdening or obstructing
commerce or the free flow of commerce, or having led or tending to lead to a
labor dispute burdening or obstructing commerce or the free flow of commerce.'

20

This definition is one of exclusion as well as inclusion. The grant of
authority to the Board does not purport to extend to the relationship between
all industrial employees and employers. Its terms do not impose collective
bargaining upon all industry regardless of effects upon interstate or foreign
commerce. It purports to reach only what may be deemed to burden or obstruct
that commerce and, thus qualified, it must be construed as contemplating the
exercise of control within constitutional bounds. It is a familiar principle
that acts which directly burden or obstruct interstate or foreign commerce, or
its free flow, are within the reach of the congressional power. Acts having
that effect are not rendered immune because they grow out of labor disputes.
See Texas & N.O.R. Co. v. Railway & S.S. Clerks, 281 U.S. 548, 570, 50 S.Ct.
427, 433, 434, 74 L.Ed. 1034; Schechter Corporation v. United States, supra,
295 U.S. 495, at pages 544, 545, 55 S.Ct. 837, 849, 79 L.Ed. 1570, 97 A.L.R.
947; Virginian Railway Co. v. System Federation No. 40, 300 U.S. 515, 57 S.Ct.
592, 81 L.Ed. 789, decided March 29, 1937. It is the effect upon commerce, not
the source of the injury, which is the criterion. Second Employers' Liability
Cases (Mondou v. New York, N.H. & H.R. Co.), 223 U.S. 1, 51, 32 S.Ct. 169, 56
L.Ed. 327, 38 L.R.A.(N.S.) 44. Whether or not particular action does affect
commerce in such a close and intimate fashion as to be subject to federal
control, and hence to lie within the authority conferred upon the Board, is
left by the statute to be determined as individual cases arise. We are thus to
inquire whether in the instant case the constitutional boundary has been
passed.

21

Second. The Unfair Labor Practices in Question.--The unfair labor practices
found by the Board are those defined in section 8, subdivisions (1) and (3).
These provide:

22

'Sec. 8. It shall be an unfair labor practice for an employer

23

'(1) To interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees in the exercise of the
rights guaranteed in section 7 (section 157 of this title). * * *

24

'(3) By discrimination in regard to hire or tenure of employment or any term
or condition of employment to encourage or discourage membership in any labor
organization.'4

25

Section 8, subdivision (1), refers to section 7, which is as follows:

26

'Section 7. Employees shall have the right to self-organization, to form,
join, or assist labor organizations, to bargain collectively through
representatives of their own choosing, and to engage in concerted activities
for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection.'

27

Thus, in its present application, the statute goes no further than to
safeguard the right of employees to self-organization and to select
representatives of their own choosing for collective bargaining or other
mutual protection without restraint or coercion by their employer.

28

That is a fundamental right. Employees have as clear a right to organize and
select their representatives for lawful purposes as the respondent has to
organize its business and select its own officers and agents. Discrimination
and coercion to prevent the free exercise of the right of employees to self-
organization and representation is a proper subject for condemnation by
competent legislative authority. Long ago we stated the reason for labor
organizations. We said that they were organized out of the necessities of the
situation; that a single employee was helpless in dealing with an employer;
that he was dependent ordinarily on his daily wage for the maintenance of
himself and family; that, if the employer refused to pay him the wages that he
thought fair, he was nevertheless unable to leave the employ and resist
arbitrary and unfair treatment; that union was essential to give laborers
opportunity to deal on an equality with their employer. American Steel
Foundries v. Tri-City Central Trades Council, 257 U.S. 184, 209, 42 S.Ct. 72,
78, 66 L.Ed. 189, 27 A.L.R. 360. We reiterated these views when we had under
consideration the Railway Labor Act of 1926, 44 Stat. 577. Fully recognizing
the legality of collective action on the part of employees in order to
safeguard their proper interests, we said that Congress was not required to
ignore this right but could safeguard it. Congress could seek to make
appropriate collective action of employees an instrument of peace rather than
of strife. We said that such collective action would be a mockery if
representation were made futile by interference with freedom of choice. Hence
the prohibition by Congress of interference with the selection of
representatives for the purpose of negotiation and conference between
employers and employees, 'instead of being an invasion of the constitutional
right of either, was based on the recognition of the rights of both.' Texas &
N.O.R. Co. v. Railway & S.S. Clerks, supra. We have reasserted the same
principle in sustaining the application of the Railway Labor Act as amended in
1934 (45 U.S.C.A. § 151 et seq.). Virginian Railway Co. v. System Federation,
No. 40, supra.

29

Third. The application of the Act to Employees Engaged in Production.--The
Principle Involved.--Respondent says that, whatever may be said of employees
engaged in interstate commerce, the industrial relations and activities in the
manufacturing department of respondent's enterprise are not subject to federal
regulation. The argument rests upon the proposition that manufacturing in
itself is not commerce. Kidd v. Pearson, 128 U.S. 1, 20, 21, 9 S.Ct. 6, 32
L.Ed. 346; United Mine Workers v. Coronado Co., 259 U.S. 344, 407, 408, 42
S.Ct. 570, 581, 582, 66 L.Ed. 975, 27 A.L.R. 762; Oliver Iron Co. v. Lord, 262
U.S. 172, 178, 43 S.Ct. 526, 529, 67 L.Ed. 929; United Leather Workers'
International Union v. Herkert & Meisel Trunk Co., 265 U.S. 457, 465, 44 S.Ct.
623, 625, 68 L.Ed. 1104, 33 A.L.R. 566; Industrial Association v. United
States, 268 U.S. 64, 82, 45 S.Ct. 403, 407, 69 L.Ed. 849; Coronado Coal Co. v.
United Mine Workers, 268 U.S. 295, 310, 45 S.Ct. 551, 556, 69 L.Ed. 963;
Schechter Corporation v. United States, supra, 295 U.S. 495, at page 547, 55
S.Ct. 837, 850, 79 L.Ed. 1570, 97 A.L.R. 947; Carter v. Carter Coal Co., 298
U.S. 238, 304, 317, 327, 56 S.Ct. 855, 869, 875, 880, 80 L.Ed. 1160.

30

The government distinguishes these cases. The various parts of respondent's
enterprise are described as interdependent and as thus involving 'a great
movement of iron ore, coal and limestone along well-defined paths to the steel
mills, thence through them, and thence in the form of steel products into the
consuming centers of the country--a definite and well-understood course of
business.' It is urged that these activities constitute a 'stream' or 'flow'
of commerce, of which the Aliquippa manufacturing plant is the focal point,
and that industrial strife at that point would cripple the entire movement.
Reference is made to our decision sustaining the Packers and Stockyards Act.5
Stafford v. Wallace, 258 U.S. 495, 42 S.Ct. 397, 66 L.Ed. 735, 23 A.L.R. 229.
The Court found that the stockyards were but a 'throat' through which the
current of commerce flowed and the transactions which there occurred could not
be separated from that movement. Hence the sales at the stockyards were not
regarded as merely local transactions, for, while they created 'a local change
of title,' they did not 'stop the flow,' but merely changed the private
interests in the subject of the current. Distinguishing the cases which upheld
the power of the state to impose a nondiscriminatory tax upon property which
the owner intended to transport to another state, but which was not in actual
transit and was held within the state subject to the disposition of the owner,
the Court remarked: 'The question, it should be observed, is not with respect
to the extent of the power of Congress to regulate interstate commerce, but
whether a particular exercise of state power in view of its nature and
operation must be deemed to be in conflict with this paramount authority.'
Id., 258 U.S. 495, at page 526, 42 S.Ct. 397, 405, 66 L.Ed. 735, 23 A.L.R.
229. See Minnesota v. Blasius, 290 U.S. 1, 8, 54 S.Ct. 34, 36, 78 L.Ed. 131.
Applying the doctrine of Stafford v. Wallace, supra, the Court sustained the
Grain Futures Act of 19226 with respect to transactions on the Chicago Board
of Trade, although these transactions were 'not in and of themselves
interstate commerce.' Congress had found that they had become 'a constantly
recurring burden and obstruction to that commerce.' Board of Trade of City of
Chicago v. Olsen, 262 U.S. 1, 32, 43 S.Ct. 470, 476, 67 L.Ed. 839. Compare
Hill v. Wallace, 259 U.S. 44, 69, 42 S.Ct. 453, 458, 66 L.Ed. 822. See, also,
Tagg Bros. & Moorhead v. United States, 280 U.S. 420, 50 S.Ct. 220, 74 L.Ed.
524.

31

Respondent contends that the instant case presents material distinctions.
Respondent says that the Aliquippa plant is extensive in size and represents a
large investment in buildings, machinery and equipment. The raw materials
which are brought to the plant are delayed for long periods and, after being
subjected to manufacturing processes 'are changed substantially as to
character, utility and value.' The finished products which emerge 'are to a
large extent manufactured without reference to pre-existing orders and
contracts and are entirely different from the raw materials which enter at the
other end.' Hence respondent argues that, 'If importation and exportation in
interstate commerce do not singly transfer purely local activities into the
field of congressional regulation, it should follow that their combination
would not alter the local situation.' Arkadelphia Milling Co. v. St. Louis,
Southwestern R. Co., 249 U.S. 134, 151, 39 S.Ct. 237, 63 L.Ed. 517; Oliver
Iron Co. v. Lord, supra.

32

We do not find it necessary to determine whether these features of defendant's
business dispose of the asserted analogy to the 'stream of commerce' cases.
The instances in which that metaphor has been used are but particular, and not
exclusive, illustrations of the protective power which the government invokes
in support of the present act. The congressional authority to protect
interstate commerce from burdens and obstructions is not limited to
transactions which can be deemed to be an essential part of a 'flow' of
interstate or foreign commerce. Burdens and obstructions may be due to
injurious action springing from other sources. The fundamental principle is
that the power to regulate commerce is the power to enact 'all appropriate
legislation' for its 'protection or advancement' (The Daniel Ball, 10 Wall.
557, 564, 19 L.Ed. 999); to adopt measures 'to promote its growth and insure
its safety' (County of Mobile v. Kimball, 102 U.S. 691, 696, 697, 26 L.Ed.
238); 'to foster, protect, control, and restrain.' (Second Employers'
Liability Cases, supra, 223 U.S. 1, at page 47, 32 S.Ct. 169, 174, 56 L.Ed.
327, 38 L.R.A.(N.S.) 44). See Texas & N.O.R. Co. v. Railway & S.S. Clerks,
supra. That power is plenary and may be exerted to protect interstate commerce
'no matter what the source of the dangers which threaten it.' Second
Employers' Liability Cases, 223 U.S. 1, at page 51, 32 S.Ct. 169, 176, 56
L.Ed. 327, 38 L.R.A.(N.S.) 44; Schechter Corporation v. United States, supra.
Although activities may be intrastate in character when separately considered,
if they have such a close and substantial relation to interstate commerce that
their control is essential or appropriate to protect that commerce from
burdens and obstructions, Congress cannot be denied the power to exercise that
control. Schechter Corporation v. United States, supra. Undoubtedly the scope
of this power must be considered in the light of our dual system of government
and may not be extended so as to embrace effects upon interstate commerce so
indirect and remote that to embrace them, in view of our complex society,
would effectually obliterate the distinction between what is national and what
is local and create a completely centralized government. Id. The question is
necessarily one of degree. As the Court said in Board of Trade of City of
Chicago v. Olsen, supra, 262 U.S. 1, at page 37, 43 S.Ct. 470, 477, 67 L.Ed.
839, repeating what had been said in Stafford v. Wallace, supra: 'Whatever
amounts to more or less constant practice, and threatens to obstruct or unduly
to burden the freedom of interstate commerce is within the regulatory power of
Congress under the commerce clause, and it is primarily for Congress to
consider and decide the fact of the danger and to meet it.'

33

That intrastate activities, by reason of close and intimate relation to
interstate commerce, may fall within federal control is demonstrated in the
case of carriers who are engaged in both interstate and intrastate
transportation. There federal control has been found essential to secure the
freedom of interstate traffic from interference or unjust discrimination and
to promote the efficiency of the interstate service. The Shreveport Case
(Houston, E. & W.T.R. Co. v. United States), 234 U.S. 342, 351. 352, 34 S.Ct.
833, 58 L.Ed. 1341; Railroad Commission of Wisconsin v. Chicago, B. & Q.R.
Co., 257 U.S. 563, 588, 42 S.Ct. 232, 237, 66 L.Ed. 371, 22 A.L.R. 1086. It is
manifest that intrastate rates deal primarily with a local activity. But in
rate making they bear such a close relation to interstate rates that effective
control of the one must embrace some control over the other. Id. Under the
Transportation Act, 1920,7 Congress went so far as to authorize the Interstate
Commerce Commission to establish a state-wide level of intrastate rates in
order to prevent an unjust discrimination against interstate commerce.
Railroad Commission of Wisconsin v. Chicago, B. & Q.R.R. Co., supra; Florida
v. United States, 282 U.S. 194, 210, 211, 51 S.Ct. 119, 123, 75 L.Ed. 291.
Other illustrations are found in the broad requirements of the Safety
Appliance Act (45 U.S.C.A. §§ 1--10) and the Hours of Service Act (45 U.S.C.A.
§§ 61 64). Southern Railway Co. v. United States, 222 U.S. 20, 32 S.Ct. 2, 56
L.Ed. 72; Baltimore & Ohio R.R. Co. v. Interstate Commerce Commission, 221
U.S. 612, 31 S.Ct. 621, 55 L.Ed. 878. It is said that this exercise of federal
power has relation to the maintenance of adequate instrumentalities of
interstate commerce. But the agency is not superior to the commerce which uses
it. The protective power extends to the former because it exists as to the
latter.

34

The close and intimate effect which brings the subject within the reach of
federal power may be due to activities in relation to productive industry
although the industry when separately viewed is local. This has been
abundantly illustrated in the application of the Federal Anti-Trust Act (15
U.S.C.A. §§ 1--7, 15 note). In the Standard Oil and American Tobacco Cases
(Standard Oil Co. v. United States), 221 U.S. 1, 31 S.Ct. 502, 55 L.Ed. 619,
34 L.R.A.(N.S.) 834, Ann.Cas.1912D, 734; (United States v. American Tobacco
Co.) 221 U.S. 106, 31 S.Ct. 632, 55 L.Ed. 663), that statute was applied to
combinations of employers engaged in productive industry. Counsel for the
offending corporations strongly urged that the Sherman Act had no application
because the acts complained of were not acts of interstate or foreign
commerce, nor direct and immediate in their effect on interstate or foreign
commerce, but primarily affected manufacturing and not commerce. 221 U.S. 1,
at page 5, 31 S.Ct. 502, 55 L.Ed. 619, 34 L.R.A.(N.S.) 834, Ann.Cas.1912D,
734; 221 U.S. 106, at page 125, 31 S.Ct. 632, 55 L.Ed. 663. Counsel relied
upon the decision in United States v. E.C. Knight Co., 156 U.S. 1, 15 S.Ct.
249, 39 L.Ed. 325. The Court stated their contention as follows: 'That the
act, even if the averments of the bill be true, cannot be constitutionally
applied, because to do so would extend the power of Congress to subject dehors
the reach of its authority to regulate commerce, by enabling that body to deal
with mere questions of production of commodities within the states.' And the
Court summarily dismissed the contention in these words: 'But all the
structure upon which this argument proceeds is based upon the decision in
United States v. E.C. Knight Co., 156 U.S. 1, 15 S.Ct. 249, 39 L.Ed. 325. The
view, however, which the argument takes of that case, and the arguments based
upon that view have been so repeatedly pressed upon this court in connection
with the interpretation and enforcement of the Anti-trust Act, and have been
so necessarily and expressly decided to be unsound as to cause the contentions
to be plainly foreclosed and to require no express notice' (citing cases). 221
U.S. 1, at pages 68, 69, 31 S.Ct. 502, 519, 55 L.Ed. 619, 34 L.R.A.(N.S.) 834,
Ann.Cas.1912D, 734.

35

Upon the same principle, the Anti-Trust Act has been applied to the conduct of
employees engaged in production. Loewe v. Lawlor, 208 U.S. 274, 28 S.Ct. 301,
52 L.Ed. 488, 13 Ann.Cas. 815; Coronado Coal Co. v. United Mine Workers,
supra; Bedford Cut Stone Co. v. Stone Cutters' Association, 274 U.S. 37, 47
S.Ct. 522, 71 L.Ed. 916, 54 A.L.R. 791. See, also, Local 167, International
Brotherhood of Teamsters v. United States, 291 U.S. 293, 297, 54 S.Ct. 396,
398, 78 L.Ed. 804; Schechter Corporation v. United States, supra. The
decisions dealing with the question of that application illustrate both the
principle and its limitation. Thus, in the first Coronado Case, the Court held
that mining was not interstate commerce, that the power of Congress did not
extend to its regulation as such, and that it had not been shown that the
activities there involved a local strike--brought them within the provisions
of the Anti-Trust Act, notwithstanding the broad terms of that statute. A
similar conclusion was reached in United Leather Workers' International Union
v. Herkert & Meisel Trunk Co., supra, Industrial Association v. United States,
supra, and Levering & Garrigues v. Morrin, 289 U.S. 103, 107, 53 S.Ct. 549,
550, 77 L.Ed. 1062. But in the first Coronado Case the Court also said that
'if Congress deems certain recurring practices though not really part of
interstate commerce, likely to obstruct, restrain or burden it, it has the
power to subject them to national supervision and restraint.' 259 U.S. 344, at
page 408, 42 S.Ct. 570, 582, 66 L.Ed. 975, 27 A.L.R. 762. And in the second
Coronado Case the Court ruled that, while the mere reduction in the supply of
an article to be shipped in interstate commerce by the illegal or tortious
prevention of its manufacture or production is ordinarily an indirect and
remote obstruction to that commerce, nevertheless when the 'intent of those
unlawfully preventing the manufacture or production is shown to be to restrain
or control the supply entering and moving in interstate commerce, or the price
of it in interstate markets, their action is a direct violation of the Anti-
Trust Act.' 268 U.S. 295, at page 310, 45 S.Ct. 551, 556, 69 L.Ed. 963. And
the existence of that intent may be a necessary inference from proof of the
direct and substantial effect produced by the employees' conduct. Industrial
Association v. United States, 268 U.S. 64, at page 81, 45 S.Ct. 403, 407, 69
L.Ed. 849. What was absent from the evidence in the first Coronado Case
appeared in the second and the act was accordingly applied to the mining
employees.

36

It is thus apparent that the fact that the employees here concerned were
engaged in production is not determinative. The question remains as to the
effect upon interstate commerce of the labor practice involved. In the
Schechter Case, supra, we found that the effect there was so remote as to be
beyond the federal power. To find 'immediacy or directness' there was to find
it 'almost everywhere,' a result inconsistent with the maintenance of our
federal system. In the Carter Case, supra, the Court was of the opinion that
the provisions of the statute relating to production were invalid upon several
grounds,--that there was improper delegation of legislative power, and that
the requirements not only went beyond any sustainable measure of protection of
interstate commerce but were also inconsistent with due process. These cases
are not controlling here.

37

Fourth. Effects of the Unfair Labor Practice in Respondent's Enterprise.--
Giving full weight to respondent's contention with respect to a break in the
complete continuity of the 'stream of commerce' by reason of respondent's
manufacturing operations, the fact remains that the stoppage of those
operations by industrial strife would have a most serious effect upon
interstate commerce. In view of respondent's far-flung activities, it is idle
to say that the effect would be indirect or remote. It is obvious that it
would be immediate and might be catastrophic. We are asked to shut our eyes to
the plainest facts of our national life and to deal with the question of
direct and indirect effects in an intellectual vacuum. Because there may be
but indirect and remote effects upon interstate commerce in connection with a
host of local enterprises throughout the country, it does not follow that
other industrial activities do not have such a close and intimate relation to
interstate commerce as to make the presence of industrial strife a matter of
the most urgent national concern. When industries organize themselves on a
national scale, making their relation to interstate commerce the dominant
factor in their activities, how can it be maintained that their industrial
labor relations constitute a forbidden field into which Congress may not enter
when it is necessary to protect interstate commerce from the paralyzing
consequences of industrial war? We have often said that interstate commerce
itself is a practical conception. It is equally true that interferences with
that commerce must be appraised by a judgment that does not ignore actual
experience.

38

Experience has abundantly demonstrated that the recognition of the right of
employees to self-organization and to have representatives of their own
choosing for the purpose of collective bargaining is often an essential
condition of industrial peace. Refusal to confer and negotiate has been one of
the most prolific causes of strife. This is such an outstanding fact in the
history of labor disturbances that it is a proper subject of judicial notice
and requires no citation of instances. The opinion in the case of Virginia
Railway Co. v. System Federation No. 40, supra, points out that, in the case
of carriers, experience has shown that before the amendment, of 1934, of the
Railway Labor Act, 'when there was no dispute as to the organizations
authorized to represent the employees, and when there was willingness of the
employer to meet such representative for a discussion of their grievances,
amicable adjustment of differences had generally followed and strikes had been
avoided.' That, on the other hand, 'a prolific source of dispute had been the
maintenance by the railroads of company unions and the denial by railway
management of the authority of representatives chosen by their employees.' The
opinion in that case also points to the large measure of success of the labor
policy embodied in the Railway Labor Act. But, with respect to the
appropriateness of the recognition of self-organization and representation in
the promotion of peace, the question is not essentially different in the case
of employees in industries of such a character that interstate commerce is put
in jeopardy from the case of employees of transportation companies. And of
what avail is it to protect the facility of transportation, if interstate
commerce is throttled with respect to the commodities to be transported! These
questions have frequently engaged the attention of Congress and have been the
subject of many inquiries.8 The steel industry is one of the great basic
industries of the United States, with ramifying activities affecting
interstate commerce at every point. The Government aptly refers to the steel
strike of 1919-1920 with its far-reaching consequences.9 The fact that there
appears to have been no major disturbance in that industry in the more recent
period did not dispose of the possibilities of future and like dangers to
interstate commerce which Congress was entitled to foresee and to exercise its
protective power to forestall. It is not necessary again to detail the facts
as to respondent's enterprise. Instead of being beyond the pale, we think that
it presents in a most striking way the close and intimate relation which a
manufacturing industry may have to interstate commerce and we have no doubt
that Congress had constitutional authority to safeguard the right of
respondent's employees to self-organization and freedom in the choice of
representatives for collective bargaining.

39

Fifth. The Means Which the Act Employs.--Questions under the Due Process
Clause and Other Constitutional Restrictions. Respondent asserts its right to
conduct its business in an orderly manner without being subjected to arbitrary
restraints. What we have said points to the fallacy in the argument. Employees
have their correlative right to organize for the purpose of securing the
redress of grievances and to promote agreements with employers relating to
rates of pay and conditions of work. Texas & N.O.R. Co. v. Railway S.S.
Clerks, supra; Virginian Railway Co. v. System Federation No. 40. Restraint
for the purpose of preventing an unjust interference with that right cannot be
considered arbitrary or capricious. The provision of section 9(a)10 that
representatives, for the purpose of collective bargaining, of the majority of
the employees in an appropriate unit shall be the exclusive representatives of
all the employees in that unit, imposes upon the respondent only the duty of
conferring and negotiating with the authorized representatives of its
employees for the purpose of settling a labor dispute. This provision has its
analogue in section 2, Ninth, of the Railway Labor Act, as amended (45
U.S.C.A. § 152, subd. 9), which was under consideration in Virginian Railway
Co. v. System Federation No. 40, supra. The decree which we affirmed in that
case required the railway company to treat with the representative chosen by
the employees and also to refrain from entering into collective labor
agreements with any one other than their true representative as ascertained in
accordance with the provisions of the act. We said that the obligation to
treat with the true representative was exclusive and hence imposed the
negative duty to treat with no other. We also pointed out that, as conceded by
the government,11 the injunction against the company's entering into any
contract concerning rules, rates of pay and working conditions except with a
chosen representative was 'designed only to prevent collective bargaining with
any one purporting to represent employees' other than the representative they
had selected. It was taken 'to prohibit the negotiation of labor contracts,
generally applicable to employees' in the described unit with any other
representative than the one so chosen, 'but not as precluding such individual
contracts' as the company might 'elect to make directly with individual
employees.' We think this construction also applies to section 9(a) of the
National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C.A. § 159(a).

40

The act does not compel agreements between employers and employees. It does
not compel any agreement whatever. It does not prevent the employer 'from
refusing to make a collective contract and hiring individuals on whatever
terms' the employer 'may by unilateral action determine.'12 The act expressly
provides in section 9(a) that any individual employee or a group of employees
shall have the right at any time to present grievances to their employer. The
theory of the act is that free opportunity for negotiation with accredited
representatives of employees is likely to promote industrial peace and may
bring about the adjustments and agreements which the act in itself does not
attempt to compel. As we said in Texas & N.O.R. Co. v. Railway & S.S. Clerks,
supra, and repeated in Virginian Railway Co. v. System Federation No. 40, the
cases of Adair v. United States, 208 U.S. 161, 28 S.Ct. 277, 52 L.Ed. 436, 13
Ann.Cas. 764, and Coppage v. Kansas, 236 U.S. 1, 35 S.Ct. 240, 59 L.Ed. 441,
L.R.A.1915C, 960, are inapplicable to legislation of this character. The act
does not interfere with the normal exercise of the right of the employer to
select its employees or to discharge them. The employer may not, under cover
of that right, intimidate or coerce its employees with respect to their self-
organization and representation, and, on the other hand, the Board is not
entitled to make its authority a pretext for interference with the right of
discharge when that right is exercised for other reasons than such
intimidation and coercion. The true purpose is the subject of investigation
with full opportunity to show the facts. It would seem that when employers
freely recognize the right of their employees to their own organizations and
their unrestricted right of representation there will be much less occasion
for controversy in respect to the free and appropriate exercise of the right
of selection and discharge.

41

The act has been criticized as one-sided in its application; that it subjects
the employer to supervision and restraint and leaves untouched the abuses for
which employees may be responsible; that it fails to provide a more
comprehensive plan, with better assurances of fairness to both sides and with
increased chances of success in bringing about, if not compelling, equitable
solutions of industrial disputes affecting interstate commerce. But we are
dealing with the power of Congress, not with a particular policy or with the
extent to which policy should go. We have frequently said that the legislative
authority, exerted within its proper field, need not embrace all the evils
within its reach. The Constitution does not forbid 'cautious advance, step by
step,' in dealing with the evils which are exhibited in activities within the
range of legislative power. Carroll v. Greenwich Insurance Co., 199 U.S. 401,
411, 26 S.Ct. 66, 50 L.Ed. 246; Keokee Coke Co. v. Taylor, 234 U.S. 224, 227,
34 S.Ct. 856, 58 L.Ed. 1288; Miller v. Wilson, 236 U.S. 373, 384, 35 S.Ct.
342, 59 L.Ed. 628, L.R.A.1915F, 829; Sproles v. Binford, 286 U.S. 374, 396, 52
S.Ct. 581, 588, 76 L.Ed. 1167. The question in such cases is whether the
Legislature, in what it does prescribe, has gone beyond constitutional limits.

42

The procedural provisions of the act are assailed. But these provisions, as we
construe them, do not offend against the constitutional requirements governing
the creation and action of administrative bodies. See Interstate Commerce
Commission v. Louisville & Nashville R. Co., 227 U.S. 88, 91, 33 S.Ct. 185, 57
L.Ed. 431. The act establishes standards to which the Board must conform.
There must be complaint, notice and hearing. The Board must receive evidence
and make findings. The findings as to the facts are to be conclusive, but only
if supported by evidence. The order of the Board is subject to review by the
designated court, and only when sustained by the court may the order be
enforced. Upon that review all questions of the jurisdiction of the Board and
the regularity of its proceedings, all questions of constitutional right or
statutory authority are open to examination by the court. We construe the
procedural provisions as affording adequate opportunity to secure judicial
protection against arbitrary action in accordance with the well-settled rules
applicable to administrative agencies set up by Congress to aid in the
enforcement of valid legislation. It is not necessary to repeat these rules
which have frequently been declared. None of them appears to have been
transgressed in the instant case. Respondent was notified and heard. It had
opportunity to meet the charge of unfair labor practices upon the merits, and
by withdrawing from the hearing it declined to avail itself of that
opportunity. The facts found by the Board support its order and the evidence
supports the findings. Respondent has no just ground for complaint on this
score.

43

The order of the Board required the reinstatement of the employees who were
found to have been discharged because of their 'union activity' and for the
purpose of 'discouraging membership in the union.' That requirement was
authorized by the act. Section 10(c), 29 U.S.C.A. § 160(c). In Texas & N.O.R.
Co. v. Railway & S.S. Clerks, supra, a similar order for restoration to
service was made by the court in contempt proceedings for the violation of an
injunction issued by the court to restrain an interference with the right of
employees as guaranteed by the Railway Labor Act of 1926. The requirement of
restoration to service of employees discharged in violation of the provisions
of that act was thus a sanction imposed in the enforcement of a judicial
decree. We do not doubt that Congress could impose a like sanction for the
enforcement of its valid regulation. The fact that in the one case it was a
judicial sanction, and in the other a legislative one, is not an essential
difference in determining its propriety.

44

Respondent complaints that the Board not only ordered reinstatement but
directed the payment of wages for the time lost by the discharge, less amounts
earned by the employee during that period. This part of the order was also
authorized by the act. Section 10(c). It is argued that the requirement is
equivalent to a money judgment and hence contravenes the Seventh Amendment
with respect to trial by jury. The Seventh Amendment provides that 'In suits
at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars; the
right of trial by jury shall be preserved.' The amendment thus preserves the
right which existed under the common law when the amendment was adopted.
Shields v. Thomas, 18 How. 253, 262, 15 L.Ed. 368; In re Wood, 210 U.S. 246,
258, 28 S.Ct. 621, 52 L.Ed. 1046; Dimick v. Schiedt, 293 U.S. 474, 476, 55
S.Ct. 296, 79 L.Ed. 603, 95 A.L.R. 1150; Baltimore & Carolina Line v. Redman,
295 U.S. 654, 657, 55 S.Ct. 890, 891, 79 L.Ed. 1636. Thus it has no
application to cases where recovery of money damages is an incident to
equitable relief even though damages might have been recovered in an action at
law. Clark v. Wooster, 119 U.S. 322, 325, 7 S.Ct. 217, 30 L.Ed. 392; Pease v.
Rathbun-Jones Engineering Co., 243 U.S. 273, 279, 37 S.Ct. 283, 61 L.Ed. 715,
Ann.Cas.1918C, 1147. It does not apply where the proceeding is not in the
nature of a suit at common law. Guthrie National Bank v. Guthrie, 173 U.S.
528, 537, 19 S.Ct. 513, 43 L.Ed. 796.

45

The instant case is not a suit at common law or in the nature of such a suit.
The proceeding is one unknown to the common law. It is a statutory proceeding.
Reinstatement of the employee and payment for time lost are requirements
imposed for violation of the statute and are remedies appropriate to its
enforcement. The contention under the Seventh Amendment is without merit.

46

Our conclusion is that the order of the Board was within its competency and
that the act is valid as here applied. The judgment of the Circuit Court of
Appeals is reversed and the cause is remanded for further proceedings in
conformity with this opinion. It is so ordered.

47

Reversed and remanded.

1

Act of July 5, 1935, 49 Stat. 449, 29 U.S.C. § 151 et seq. (29 U.S.C.A. § 151
et seq.).

2

This section is as follows:

'Section 1. The denial by employers of the right of employees to organize and
the refusal by employers to accept the procedure of collective bargaining lead
to strikes and other forms of industrial strife or unrest, which have the
intent or the necessary effect of burdening or obstructing commerce by (a)
impairing the efficiency, safety, or operation of the instrumentalities of
commerce; (b) occurring in the current of commerce; (c) materially affecting,
restraining, or controlling the flow of raw materials or manufactured or
processed goods from or into the channels of commerce, or the prices of such
materials or goods in commerce; or (d) causing diminution of employment and
wages in such volume as substantially to impair or disrupt the market for
goods flowing from or into the channels of commerce.

'The inequality of bargaining power between employees who do not possess full
freedom of association or actual liberty of contract, and employers who are
organized in the corporate or other forms of ownership association
substantially burdens and affects the flow of commerce, and tends to aggravate
recurrent business depressions, by depressing wage rates and the purchasing
power of wage earners in industry and by preventing the stabilization of
competitive wage rates and working conditions within and between industries.

'Experience has proved that protection by law of the right of employees to
organize and bargain collectively safeguards commerce from injury, impairment,
or interruption, and promotes the flow of commerce by removing certain
recognized sources of industrial strife and unrest, by encouraging practices
fundamental to the friendly adjustment of industrial disputes arising out of
differences as to wages, hours, or other working conditions, and by restoring
equality of bargaining power between employers and employees.

'It is hereby declared to be the policy of the United States to eliminate the
causes of certain substantial obstructions to the free flow of commerce and to
mitigate and eliminate these obstructions when they have occurred by
encouraging the practice and procedure of collective bargaining and by
protecting the exercise by workers of full freedom of association, self-
organization, and designation of representatives of their own choosing, for
the purpose of negotiating the terms and conditions of their employment or
other mutual aid or protection.' 29 U.S.C.A. § 151.

3

See note 2.

4

What is quoted above is followed by this proviso--not here involved--'
Provided, That nothing in this Act (chapter), or in the National Industrial
Recovery Act (U.S.C., Supp. VII, title 15, Secs. 701--712), as amended from
time to time (sections 701 to 712 of Title 15), or in any code or agreement
approved or prescribed thereunder, or in any other statute of the United
States, shall preclude an employer from making an agreement with a labor
organization (not established, maintained, or assisted by any action defined
in this Act (chapter) as an unfair labor practice) to require as a condition
of employment membership therein, if such labor organization is the
representative of the employees as provided in section 9(a) (section 159(a) of
this title), in the appropriate collective bargaining unit covered by such
agreement when made.'

5

42 Stat. 159 (7 U.S.C.A. § 181 et seq.).

6

42 Stat. 998 (7 U.S.C.A. §§ 1--17).

7

Sections 416, 422, 41 Stat. 484, 488 (49 U.S.C.A. §§ 13, 15a); Interstate
Commerce Act, § 13(4), 49 U.S.C.A. § 13(4).

8

See, for example, Final Report of the Industrial Commission (1902), vol. 19,
p. 844; Report of the Anthracite Coal Strike Commission (1902), Sen.Doc. No.
6, 58th Cong., Spec.Sess.; Final Report of Commission on Industrial Relations
(1916), Sen.Doc. No. 415, 64th Cong., 1st Sess., vol. 1; National War Labor
Board, Principles and Rules of Procedure (1919), p. 4; Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Bulletin No. 287 (1921), pp. 52--64; History of the Shipbuilding
Labor Adjustment Board, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Bulletin No. 283.

9

See Investigating Strike in Steel Industries, Sen.Rep. No. 289, 66th Cong.,
1st Sess.

10

The provision is as follows: 'Sec. 9(a). Representatives designated or
selected for the purposes of collective bargaining by the majority of the
employees in a unit appropriate for such purposes, shall be the exclusive
representatives of all the employees in such unit for the purposes of
collective bargaining in respect to rates of pay, wages, hours of employment,
or other conditions of employment: Provided, That any individual employee or a
group of employees shall have the right at any time to present grievances to
their employer.' 29 U.S.C.A. § 159(a).

11

See Virginian Railway Co. v. System Federation No. 40, 300 U.S. 515, 57 S.Ct.
592, 600, 81 L.Ed. 789, note 6, decided March 29, 1937.

12

See note 11.

