391 U.S. 367

88 S.Ct. 1673

20 L.Ed.2d 672

UNITED STATES, Petitioner,  
v.  
David Paul O'BRIEN. David Paul O'BRIEN, Petitioner, v. UNITED STATES.

Nos. 232, 233.

Argued Jan. 24, 1968.

Decided May 27, 1968.

[Syllabus from pages 367-368 intentionally omitted]

Solicitor Gen. Erwin N. Griswold for the United States.

Marvin M. Karpatkin, New York City, for David Paul O'Brien.

Mr. Chief Justice WARREN delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

On the morning of March 31, 1966, David Paul O'Brien and three companions
burned their Selective Service registration certificates on the steps of the
South Boston Courthouse. A sizable crowd, including several agents of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, witnessed the event.1 Immediately after the
burning, members of the crowd began attacking O'Brien and his companions. An
FBI agent ushered O'Brien to safety inside the courthouse. After he was
advised of his right to counsel and to silence, O'Brien stated to FBI agents
that he had burned his registration certificate because of his beliefs,
knowing that he was violating federal law. He produced the charred remains of
the certificate, which, with his consent, were photographed.

2

For this act, O'Brien was indicted, tried, convicted, and sentenced in the
United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts.2 He did not
contest the fact that he had burned the certificate. He stated in argument to
the jury that he burned the certificate publicly to influence others to adopt
his antiwar beliefs, as he put it, 'so that other people would reevaluate
their positions with Selective Service, with the armed forces, and reevaluate
their place in the culture of today, to hopefully consider my position.'

3

The indictment upon which he was tried charged that he 'willfully and
knowingly did multilate, destroy, and change by burning * * * (his)
Registration Certificate (Selective Service System Form No. 2); in violation
of Title 50, App., United States Code, Section 462(b).' Section 462(b) is part
of the Universal Military Training and Service Act of 1948. Section 462(b)(3),
one of six numbered subdivisions of § 462(b), was amended by Congress in 1965,
79 Stat. 586 (adding the words italicized below), so that at the time O'Brien
burned his certificate an offense was committed by any person,

4

'who forges, alters, knowingly destroys, knowingly mutilates, or in any manner
changes any such certificate * * *.' (Italics supplied.)

5

In the District Court, O'Brien argued that the 1965 Amendment prohibiting the
knowing destruction or mutilation of certificates was unconstitutional because
it was enacted to abridge free speech, and because it served no legitimate
legislative purpose.3 The District Court rejected these arguments, holding
that the statute on its face did not abridge First Amendment rights, that the
court was not competent to inquire into the motives of Congress in enacting
the 1965 Amendment, and that the Amendment was a reasonable exercise of the
power of Congress to raise armies.

6

On appeal, the Court of Appeals for the First Circuit held the 1965 Amendment
unconstitutional as a law abridging freedom of speech.4 At the time the
Amendment was enacted, a regulation of the Selective Service System required
registrants to keep their registration certificates in their 'personal
possession at all times.' 32 CFR § 1617.1 (1962).5 Wilful violations of
regulations promulgated pursuant to the Universal Military Training and
Service Act were made criminal by statute. 50 U.S.C. App. § 462(b)(6). The
Court of Appeals, therefore, was of the opinion that conduct punishable under
the 1965 Amendment was already punishable under the nonpossession regulation,
and consequently that the Amendment served no valid purpose; further, that in
light of the prior regulation, the Amendment must have been 'directed at
public as distinguished from private destruction.' On this basis, the court
concluded that the 1965 Amendment ran afoul of the First Amendment by singling
out persons engaged in protests for special treatment. The court ruled,
however, that O'Brien's conviction should be affirmed under the statutory
provision, 50 U.S.C. App. § 462(b)(6), which in its view made violation of the
nonpossession regulation a crime, because it regarded such violation to be a
lesser included offense of the crime defined by the 1965 Amendment.6

7

The Government petitioner for certiorari in No. 232, arguing that the Court of
Appeals erred in holding the statute unconstitutional, and that its decision
conflicted with decisions by the Courts of Appeals for the Second7 and Eighth
Circuits8 upholding the 1965 Amendment against identical constitutional
challenges. O'Brien cross-petitioned for certiorari in No. 233, arguing that
the Court of Appeals erred in sustaining his conviction on the basis of a
crime of which he was neither charged nor tried. We granted the Government's
petition to resolve the conflict in the circuits, and we also granted
O'Brien's cross-petition. We hold that the 1965 Amendment is constitutional
both as enacted and as applied. We therefore vacate the judgment of the Court
of Appeals and reinstate the judgment and sentence of the District Court
without reaching the issue raised by O'Brien in No. 233.

I.

8

When a male reaches the age of 18, he is required by the Universal Military
Training and Service Act to register with a local draft board.9 He is assigned
a Selective Service number,10 and within five days he is issued a registration
certificate (SSS Form No. 2).11 Subsequently, and based on a questionnaire
completed by the registrant,12 he is assigned a classification denoting his
eligibility for induction,13 and '(a)s soon as practicable' thereafter he is
issued a Notice of Classification (SSS Form No. 110).14 This initial
classification is not necessarily permanent,15 and if in the interim before
induction the registrant's status changes in some relevant way, he may be
reclassified.16 After such a reclassification, the local board 'as soon as
practicable' issues to the registrant a new Notice of Classification.17

9

Both the registration and classification certificates are small white cards,
approximately 2 by 3 inches. The registration certificate specifies the name
of the registrant, the date of registration, and the number and address of the
local board with which he is registered. Also inscribed upon it are the date
and place of the registrant's birth, his residence at registration, his
physical description, his signature, and his Selective Service number. The
Selective Service number itself indicates his State of registration, his local
board, his year of birth, and his chronological position in the local board's
classification record.18

10

The classification certificate shows the registrant's name, Selective Service
number, signature, and eligibility classification. It specifies whether he was
so classified by his local board, an appeal board, or the President. It
contains the address of his local board and the date the certificate was
mailed.

11

Both the registration and classification certificates bear notices that the
registrant must notify his local board in writing of every change in address,
physical condition, and occupational, marital, family, dependency, and
military status, and of any other fact which might change his classification.
Both also contain a notice that the registrant's Selective Service number
should appear on all communications to his local board.

12

Congress demonstrated its concern that certificates issued by the Selective
Service System might be abused well before the 1965 Amendment here challenged.
The 1948 Act, 62 Stat. 604, itself prohibited many different abuses involving
'any registration certificate, * * * or any other certificate issued pursuant
to or prescribed by the provisions of this title, or rules or regulations
promulgated hereunder * * *.' 62 Stat. 622. Under §§ 12(b)(1)--(5) of the 1948
Act, it was unlawful (1) to transfer a certificate to aid a person in making
false identification; (2) to possess a certificate not duly issued with the
intent of using it for false identification; (3) to forge, alter, 'or in any
manner' change a certificate or any notation validly inscribed thereon; (4) to
photograph or make an imitation of a certificate for the purpose of false
identification; and (5) to possess a counterfeited or altered certificate. 62
Stat. 622. In addition, as previously mentioned, regulations of the Selective
Service System required registrants to keep both their registration and
classification certificates in their personal possession at all times. 32 CFR
§ 1617.1 (1962) (Registration Certificates);19 32 CFR § 1623.5 (1962)
(Classification Certificates).20 And § 12(b)(6) of the Act, 62 Stat. 622, made
knowing violation of any provision of the Act or rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto a felony.

13

By the 1965 Amendment, Congress added to § 12(b)(3) of the 1948 Act the
provision here at issue, subjecting to criminal liability not only one who
'forges, alters, or in any manner changes' but also one who 'knowingly
destroys (or) knowingly mutilates' a certificate. We note at the outset that
the 1965 Amendment plainly does not abridge free speech on its face, and we do
not understand O'Brien to argue otherwise. Amended § 12(b)(3) on its face
deals with conduct having no connection with speech. It prohibits the knowing
destruction of certificates issued by the Selective Service System, and there
is nothing necessarily expressive about such conduct. The Amendment does not
distinguish between public and private destruction, and it does not punish
only destruction engaged in for the purpose of expressing views. Compare
Stromberg v. People of State of California, 283 U.S. 359, 51 S.Ct. 532, 75
L.Ed. 1117 (1931).21 A law prohibiting destruction of Selective Service
certificates no more abridges free speech on its face than a motor vehicle law
prohibiting the destruction of drivers' licenses, or a tax law prohibiting the
destruction of books and records.

14

O'Brien nonetheless argues that the 1965 Amendment is unconstitutional in its
application to him, and is unconstitutional as enacted because what he calls
the 'purpose' of Congress was 'to suppress freedom of speech.' We consider
these arguments separately.

II.

15

O'Brien first argues that the 1965 Amendment is unconstitutional as applied to
him because his act of burning his registration certificate was protected
'symbolic speech' within the First Amendment. His argument is that the freedom
of expression which the First Amendment guarantees includes all modes of
'communication of ideas by conduct,' and that his conduct is within this
definition because he did it in 'demonstration against the war and against the
draft.'

16

We cannot accept the view that an apparently limitless variety of conduct can
be labeled 'speech' whenever the person engaging in the conduct intends
thereby to express an idea. However, even on the assumption that the alleged
communicative element in O'Brien's conduct is sufficient to bring into play
the First Amendment, it does not necessarily follow that the destruction of a
registration certificate is constitutionally protected activity. This Court
has held that when 'speech' and 'nonspeech' elements are combined in the same
course of conduct, a sufficiently important governmental interest in
regulating the nonspeech element can justify incidental limitations on First
Amendment freedoms. To characterize the quality of the governmental interest
which must appear, the Court has employed a variety of descriptive terms:
compelling;22 substantial;23 subordinating;24 paramount;25 cogent;26 strong.27
Whatever imprecision inheres in these terms, we think it clear that a
government regulation is sufficiently justified if it is within the
constitutional power of the Government; if it furthers an important or
substantial governmental interest; if the governmental interest is unrelated
to the suppression of free expression; and if the incidental restriction on
alleged First Amendment freedoms is no greater than is essential to the
furtherance of that interest. We find that the 1965 Amendment to § 12(b)(3) of
the Universal Military Training and Service Act meets all of these
requirements, and consequently that O'Brien can be constitutionally convicted
for violating it.

17

The constitutional power of Congress to raise and support armies and to make
all laws necessary and proper to that end is broad and sweeping. Lichter v.
Uniter States, 334 U.S. 742, 755 758, 68 S.Ct. 1294, 1301--1303, 92 L.Ed. 1694
(1948); Selective Draft Law Cases, 245 U.S. 366, 38 S.Ct. 159, 62 L.Ed. 349
(1918); see also Ex parte Quirin, 317 U.S. 1, 25--26, 63 S.Ct. 1, 9--10, 87
L.Ed. 3 (1942). The power of Congress to classify and conscript manpower for
military service is 'beyond question.' Lichter v. United States, supra, 334
U.S. at 756, 68 S.Ct. at 1302; Selective Draft Law Cases, supra. Pursuant to
this power, Congress may establish a system of registration for individuals
liable for training and service, and may require such individuals within
reason to cooperate in the registration system. The issuance of certificates
indicating the registration and eligibility classification of individuals is a
legitimate and substantial administrative aid in the functioning of this
system. And legislation to insure the continuing availability of issued
certificates serves a legitimate and substantial purpose in the system's
administration.

18

O'Brien's argument to the contrary is necessarily premised upon his
unrealistic characterization of Selective Service certificates. He essentially
adopts the position that such certificates are so many pieces of paper
designed to notify registrants of their registration or classification, to be
retained or tossed in the wastebasket according to the convenience or taste of
the registrant. Once the registrant has received notification, according to
this view, there is no reason for him to retain the certificates. O'Brien
notes that most of the information on a registration certificate serves no
notification purpose at all; the registrant hardly needs to be told his
address and physical characteristics. We agree that the registration
certificate contains much information of which the registrant needs no
notification. This circumstance, however, does not lead to the conclusion that
the certificate serves no purpose, but that, like the classification
certificate, it serves purposes in addition to initial notification. Many of
these purposes would be defeated by the certificates' destruction or
mutilation. Among these are:

19

1\. The registration certificate serves as proof that the individual described
thereon has registered for the draft. The classification certificate shows the
eligibility classification of a named but undescribed individual. Voluntarily
displaying the two certificates is an easy and painless way for a young man to
dispel a question as to whether he might be delinquent in his Selective
Service obligations. Correspondingly, the availability of the certificates for
such display relieves the Selective Service System of the administrative
burden it would otherwise have in verifying the registration and
classification of all suspected delinquents. Further, since both certificates
are in the nature of 'receipts' attesting that the registrant has done what
the law requires, it is in the interest of the just and efficient
administration of the system that they be continually available, in the event,
for example, of a mix-up in the registrant's file. Additionally, in a time of
national crisis, reasonable availability to each registrant of the two small
cards assures a rapid and uncomplicated means for determining his fitness for
immediate induction, no matter how distant in our mobile society he may be
from his local board.

20

2\. The information supplied on the certificates facilitates communication
between registrants and local boards, simplifying the system and benefiting
all concerned. To begin with, each certificate bears the address of the
registrant's local board, an item unlikely to be committed to memory. Further,
each card bears the registrant's Selective Service number, and a registrant
who has his number readily available so that he can communicate it to his
local board when he supplies or requests information can make simpler the
board's task in locating his file. Finally, a registrant's inquiry,
particularly through a local board other than his own, concerning his
eligibility status is frequently answerable simply on the basis of his
classification certificate; whereas, if the certificate were not reasonably
available and the registrant were uncertain of his classification, the task of
answering his questions would be considerably complicated.

21

3\. Both certificates carry continual reminders that the registrant must
notify his local board of any change of address, and other specified changes
in his status. The smooth functioning of the system requires that local boards
be continually aware of the status and whereabouts of registrants, and the
destruction of certificates deprives the system of a potentially useful notice
device.

22

4\. The regulatory scheme involving Selective Service certificates includes
clearly valid prohibitions against the alteration, forgery, or similar
deceptive misuse of certificates. The destruction or mutilation of
certificates obviously increases the difficulty of detecting and tracing
abuses such as these. Further, a mutilated certificate might itself be used
for deceptive purposes.

23

The many functions performed by Selective Service certificates establish
beyond doubt that Congress has a legitimate and substantial interest in
preventing their wanton and unrestrained destruction and assuring their
continuing availability by punishing people who knowingly and wilfully destroy
or mutilate them. And we are unpersuaded that the pre-existence of the
nonpossession regulations in any way negates this interest.

24

In the absence of a question as to multiple punishment, it has never been
suggested that there is anything improper in Congress' providing alternative
statutory avenues of prosecution to assure the effective protection of one and
the same interest. Compare the majority and dissenting opinions in Gore v.
United States, 357 U.S. 386, 78 S.Ct. 1280, 2 L.Ed.2d 1405 (1958).28 Here, the
pre-existing avenue of prosecution was not even statutory. Regulations may be
modified or revoked from time to time by administrative discretion. Certainly,
the Congress may change or supplement a regulation.

25

Equally important, a comparison of the regulations with the 1965 Amendment
indicates that they protect overlapping but not identical governmental
interests, and that they reach somewhat different classes of wrongdoers.29 The
gravamen of the offense defined by the statute is the deliberate rendering of
certificates unavailable for the various purposes which they may serve.
Whether registrants keep their certificates in their personal possession at
all times, as required by the regulations, is of no particular concern under
the 1965 Amendment, as long as they do not mutilate or destroy the
certificates so as to render them unavailable. Although as we note below we
are not concerned here with the nonpossession regulations, it is not
inappropriate to observe that the essential elements of nonpossession are not
identical with those of mutilation or destruction. Finally, the 1965
Amendment, like § 12(b) which it amended, is concerned with abuses involving
any issued Selective Service certificates, not only with the registrant's own
certificates. The knowing destruction or mutilation of someone else's
certificates would therefore violate the statute but not the nonpossession
regulations.

26

We think it apparent that the continuing availability to each registrant of
his Selective Service certificates substantially furthers the smooth and
proper functioning of the system that Congress has established to raise
armies. We think it also apparent that the Nation has a vital interest in
having a system for raising armies that functions with maximum efficiency and
is capable of easily and quickly responding to continually changing
circumstances. For these reasons, the Government has a substantial interest in
assuring the continuing availability of issued Selective Service certificates.

27

It is equally clear that the 1965 Amendment specifically protects this
substantial governmental interest. We perceive no alternative means that would
more precisely and narrowly assure the continuing availability of issued
Selective Service certificates than a law which prohibits their wilful
mutilation or destruction. Compare Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398, 407--408,
83 S.Ct. 1790, 1795--1796, 10 L.Ed.2d 965 (1963), and the cases cited therein.
The 1965 Amendment prohibits such conduct and does nothing more. In other
words, both the governmental interest and the operation of the 1965 Amendment
are limited to the noncommunicative aspect of O'Brien's conduct. The
governmental interest and the scope of the 1965 Amendment are limited to
preventing harm to the smooth and efficient functioning of the Selective
Service System. When O'Brien deliberately rendered unavailable his
registration certificate, he wilfully frustrated this governmental interest.
For this noncommunicative impact of his conduct, and for nothing else, he was
convicted.

28

The case at bar is therefore unlike one where the alleged governmental
interest in regulating conduct arises in some measure because the
communication allegedly integral to the conduct is itself thought to be
harmful. In Stromberg v. People of State of California, 283 U.S. 359, 51 S.Ct.
532, 75 L.Ed. 1117 (1931), for example, this Court struck down a statutory
phrase which punished people who expressed their 'opposition to organized
government' by displaying 'any flag, badge, banner, or device.' Since the
statute there was aimed at suppressing communication it could not be sustained
as a regulation of noncommunicative conduct. See also, NLRB v. Fruit &
Vegetable Packers Union, 377 U.S. 58, 79, 84 S.Ct. 1063, 1074, 12 L.Ed.2d 129
(1964) (concurring opinion).

29

In conclusion, we find that because of the Government's substantial interest
in assuring the continuing availability of issued Selective Service
certificates, because amended § 462(b) is an appropriately narrow means of
protecting this interest and condemns only the independent noncommunicative
impact of conduct within its reach, and because the noncommunicative impact of
O'Brien's act of burning his registration certificate frustrated the
Government's interest, a sufficient governmental interest has been shown to
justify O'Brien's conviction.

III.

30

O'Brien finally argues that the 1965 Amendment is unconstitutional as enacted
because what he calls the 'purpose' of Congress was 'to suppress freedom of
speech.' We reject this argument because under settled principles the purpose
of Congress, as O'Brien uses that term, is not a basis for declaring this
legislation unconstitutional.

31

It is a familiar principle of constitutional law that this Court will not
strike down an otherwise constitutional statute on the basis of an alleged
illicit legislative motive. As the Court long ago stated:

32

'The decisions of this court from the beginning lend no support whatever to
the assumption that the judiciary may restrain the exercise of lawful power on
the assumption that a wrongful purpose or motive has caused the power to be
exerted.' McCray v. United States, 195 U.S. 27, 56, 24 S.Ct. 769, 776, 49
L.Ed. 78 (1904).

33

This fundamental principle of constitutional adjudication was reaffirmed and
the many cases were collected by Mr. Justice Brandeis for the Court in State
of Arizona v. State of California, 283 U.S. 423, 455, 51 S.Ct. 522, 526, 75
L.Ed. 1154 (1931).

34

Inquiries into congressional motives or purposes are a hazardous matter. When
the issue is simply the interpretation of legislation, the Court will look to
statements by legislators for guidance as to the purpose of the legislature,30
because the benefit to sound decision-making inthis circumstance is thought
sufficient to risk the possibility of misreading Congress' purpose. It is
entirely a different matter when we are asked to void a statute that is, under
well-settled criteria, constitutional on its face, on the basis of what fewer
than a handful of Congressmen said about it. What motivates one legislator to
make a speech about a statute is not necessarily what motivates scores of
others to enact it, and the stakes are sufficiently high for us to eschew
guesswork. We decline to void essentially on the ground that it is unwise
legislation which Congress had the undoubted power to enact and which could be
reenacted in its exact form if the same or another legislator made a 'wiser'
speech about it.

35

O'Brien's position, and to some extent that of the court below, rest upon a
misunderstanding of Grosjean v. American Press Co., 297 U.S. 233, 56 S.Ct.
444, 80 L.Ed. 660 (1936), and Gomillion v. Lighfoot, 364 U.S. 339, 81 S.Ct.
125, 5 L.Ed.2d 110 (1960). These cases stand, not for the proposition that
legislative motive is a proper basis for declaring a statute unconstitutional,
but that the inevitable effect of a statute on its face may render it
unconstitutional. Thus, in Grosjean the Court, having concluded that the right
of publications to be free from certain kinds of taxes was a freedom of the
press protected by the First Amendment, struck down a statute which on its
face did nothing other than impose just such a tax. Similarly, in Gomillion,
the Court sustained a complaint which, if true, established that the
'inevitable effect,' 364 U.S., at 341, 81 S.Ct. at 127, of the redrawing of
municipal boundaries was to deprive the petitioners of their right to vote for
no reason other than that they were Negro. In these cases, the purpose of the
legislation was irrelevant, because the inevitable effect--the 'necessary
scope and operation,' McCray v. United States, 195 U.S. 27, 59, 24 S.Ct. 769,
777, 49 L.Ed. 78 (1904)--abridged constitutional rights. The statute attacked
in the instant case has no such inevitable unconstitutional effect, since the
destruction of Selective Service certificates is in no respect inevitably or
necessarily expressive. Accordingly, the statute itself is constitutional.

36

We think it not amiss, in passing, to comment upon O'Brien's legislative-
purpose argument. There was little floor debate on this legislation in either
House. Only Senator Thurmond commented on its substantive features in the
Senate. 111 Cong.Rec. 19746, 20433. After his brief statement, and without any
additional substantive comments, the bill, H.R. 10306, passed the Senate. 111
Cong.Rec. 20434. In the House debate only two Congressment addressed
themselves to the Amendment--Congressmen Rivers and Bray. 111 Cong.Rec. 19871,
19872. The bill was passed after their statements without any further debate
by a vote of 393 to 1. It is principally on the basis of the statements by
these three Congressmen that O'Brienmakes his congressional-'purpose'
argument. We note that if we were to examine legislative purpose in the
instant case, we would be obliged to consider not only these statements but
also the more authoritative reports of the Senate and House Armed Services
Committees. The portions of those reports explaining the purpose of the
Amendment are reproduced in the Appendix in their entirety. While both reports
make clear a concern with the 'defiant' destruction of so-called 'draft cards'
and with 'open' encouragement to others to destroy their cards, both reports
also indicate that this concern stemmed from an apprehension that unrestrained
destruction of cards would disrupt the smooth functioning of the Selective
Service System.

IV.

37

Since the 1965 Amendment to § 12(b)(3) of the Universal Military Training and
Service Act is constitutional as enacted and as applied, the Court of Appeals
should have affirmed the judgment of conviction entered by the District Court.
Accordingly, we vacate the judgment of the Court of Appeals, and reinstate the
judgment and sentence of the District Court. This disposition makes
unnecessary consideration of O'Brien's claim that the Court of Appeals erred
in affirming his conviction on the basis of the nonpossession regulation.31

38

It is so ordered.

39

Mr. Justice MARSHALL took no part in the consideration or decision of these
cases.

APPENDIX TO OPINION OF THE COURT.

40

PORTIONS OF THE REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEES ON ARMED SERVICES OF THE SENATE AND
HOUSE EXPLAINING THE 1965 AMENDMENT.

41

The 'Explanation of the Bill' in the Senate Report is as follows:

42

'Section 12(b)(3) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act of 1951,
as amended, provides, among other things, that a person who forges, alters, or
changes a draft registration certificate is subject to a fine of not more than
$10,000 or imprisonment of not more than 5 years, or both. There is no
explicit prohibition in this section against the knowing destruction or
mutilation of such cards.

43

'The committee has taken notice of the defiant destruction and mutilation of
draft cards by dissident persons who disapprove of national policy. If allowed
to continue unchecked this contumacious conduct represents a potential threat
to the exercise of the power to raise and support armies.

44

'For a person to be subject to fine or imprisonment the destruction or
mutilation of the draft card must be 'knowingly' done. This qualification is
intended to protect persons who lose or mutilate draft cards accidentally.'
S.Rep. No. 589, 89th Cong., 1st Sess. (1965). And the House Report explained:

45

'Section 12(b)(3) of the Universal Military Training and Service Act of 1951,
as amended, provides that a person who forges, alters, or in any manner
changes his draft registration card, or any notation duly and validly
inscribed thereon, will be subject to a fine of $10,000 or imprisonment of not
more than 5 years. H.R. 10306 would amend this provision to make it apply also
to those persons who knowingly destroy or knowingly mutilate a draft
registration card.

46

'The House Committee on Armed Services is fully aware of, and shares in, the
deep concern expressed throughout the Nation over the increasing incidences in
which individuals and large groups of individuals openly defy and encourage
others to defy the authority of their Government by destroying or mutilating
their draft cards.

47

'While the present provisions of the Criminal Code with respect to the
destruction of Government property may appear broad enough to cover all acts
having to do with the mistreatment of draft cards in the possession of
individuals, the committee feels that in the present critical situation of the
country, the acts of destroying or mutilating these cards are offenses which
pose such a grave threat to the security of the Nation that no question
whatsoever should be left as to the intention of the Congress that such wanton
and irresponsible acts should be punished.

48

'To this end, H.R. 10306 makes specific that knowingly mutilating or knowingly
destroying a draft card constitutes a violation of the Universal Military
Training and Service Act and is punishable thereunder; and that a person who
does so destroy or mutilate a draft card will be subject to a fine of not more
than $10,000 or imprisonment of not more than 5 years.' H.R.Rep. No. 747, 89th
Cong., 1st Sess. (1965) U.S. Congressional and Administrative News, p. 2890.

49

Mr. Justice HARLAN, concurring.

50

The crux of the Court's opinion, which I join, is of course its general
statement, ante, at 377, that:

51

'a government regulation is sufficiently justified if it is within the
constitutional power of the Government; if it furthers an important or
substantial governmental interest; if the governmental interest is unrelated
to the suppression of free expression; and if the incidental restriction on
alleged First Amendment freedoms is no greater than is essential to the
furtherance of that interest.'

52

I wish to make explicit my understanding that this passage does not foreclose
consideration of First Amendment claims in those rare instances when an
'incidental' restriction upon expression, imposed by a regulation which
furthers an 'important or substantial' governmental interest and satisfies the
Court's other criteria, in practice has the effect of entirely preventing a
'speaker' from reaching a significant audience with whom he could not
otherwise lawfully communicate. This is not such a case, since O'Brien
manifestly could have conveyed his message in many ways other than by burning
his draft card.

53

Mr. Justice DOUGLAS, dissenting.

54

The Court states that the constitutional power of Congress to raise and
support armies is 'broad and sweeping' and that Congress' power 'to classify
and conscript manpower for military service is 'beyond question." This is
undoubtedly true in times when, by declaration of Congress, the Nation is in a
state of war. The underlying and basic problem in this case, however, is
whether conscription is permissible in the absence of a declaration of war.1
That question has not been briefed nor was it presented in oral argument; but
it is, I submit, a question upon which the litigants and the country are
entitled to a ruling. I have discussed in Holmes v. United States, 390 U.S.
936, 88 S.Ct. 1835, the nature of the legal issue and it will be seen from my
dissenting opinion in that case that this Court has never ruled on the
question. It is time that we made a ruling. This case should be put down for
reargument and heard with Holmes v. United States and with Hart v. United
States, 390 U.S. 956, 88 S.Ct. 1851, 20 L.Ed.2d 871, in which the Court today
denies certiorari.2

55

The rule that this Court will not consider issues not raised by the parties is
not inflexible and yields in 'exceptional cases' (Duignan v. United States,
274 U.S. 195, 200, 47 S.Ct. 566, 71 L.Ed. 996) to the need correctly to decide
the case before the court. E.g., Erie R. Co. v. Tompkins, 304 U.S. 64, 58
S.Ct. 817, 82 L.Ed. 1188; Terminiello v. City of Chicago, 337 U.S. 1, 69 S.Ct.
894, 93 L.Ed. 1131.

56

In such a case it is not unusual to ask for reargument (Sherman v. United
States, 356 U.S. 369, 379, n. 2, 78 S.Ct. 819, 2 L.Ed.2d 848, Frankfurter, J.,
concurring) even on a constitutional question not raised by the parties. In
Abel v. United States, 362 U.S. 217, 80 S.Ct. 683, 4 L.Ed.2d 668, the
petitioner had conceded that an administrative deportation arrest warrant
would be valid for its limited purpose even though not supported by a sworn
affidavit stating probable cause; but the Court ordered reargument on the
question whether the warrant had been validly issued in petitioner's case. 362
U.S., at 219, n., par. 1, 80 S.Ct. at 687; 359 U.S. 940, 79 S.Ct. 720, 3
L.Ed.2d 674. In Lustig v. United States, 338 U.S. 74, 69 S.Ct. 1372, 93 L.Ed.
1819, the petitioner argued that an exclusionary rule should apply to the
fruit of an unreasonable search by state officials solely because they acted
in concert with federal officers (see Weeks v. United States, 232 U.S. 383, 34
S.Ct. 341, 58 L.Ed. 652; Byars v. United States, 273 U.S. 28, 47 S.Ct. 248, 71
L.Ed. 520). The Court ordered reargument on the question raised in a then
pending case, Wolf v. People of State of Colorado, 338 U.S. 25, 69 S.Ct. 1359,
93 L.Ed. 1782, applicability of the Fourth Amendment to the States.
U.S.Sup.Ct. Journal, October Term, 1947, p. 298. In Donaldson v. Read
Magazine, 333 U.S. 178, 68 S.Ct. 591, 92 L.Ed. 628, the only issue presented,
according to both parties, was whether the record contained sufficient
evidence of fraud to uphold an order of the Postmaster General. Reargument was
ordered on the constitutional issue of abridgment of First Amendment freedoms.
333 U.S., at 181--182, 68 S.Ct. at 593--594; Journal, October Term, 1947, p.
70. Finally, in Musser v. Utah, 333 U.S. 95, 96, 68 S.Ct. 397, 92 L.Ed. 562,
reargument was ordered on the question of unconstitutional vagueness of a
criminal statute, an issue not raised by the parties but suggested at oral
argument by Justice Jackson. Journal, October Term, 1947, p. 87.

57

These precedents demonstrate the appropriateness of restoring the instant case
to the calendar for reargument on the question of the constitutionality of a
peacetime draft and having it heard with Holmes v. United States and Hart v.
United States.

1

At the time of the burning, the agents knew only that O'Brien and his three
companions had burned small white cards. They later discovered that the card
O'Brien burned was his registration certificate, and the undisputed assumption
is that the same is true of his companions.

2

He was sentenced under the Youth Corrections Act, 18 U.S.C. § 5010(b), to the
custody of the Attorney General for a maximum period of six years for
supervision and treatment.

3

The issue of the constitutionality of the 1965 Amendment was raised by counsel
representing O'Brien in a pretrial motion to dismiss the indictment. At trial
and upon sentencing, O'Brien chose to represent himself. He was represented by
counsel on his appeal to the Court of Appeals.

4

O'Brien v. United States, 376 F.2d 538 (C.A.1st Cir. 1967).

5

The portion of 32 CFR relevant to the instant case was revised as of January
1, 1967. Citations in this opinion are to the 1962 edition which was in effect
when O'Brien committed the crime, and when Congress enacted the 1965
Amendment.

6

The Court of Appeals nevertheless remanded the case to the District Court to
vacate the sentence and resentence O'Brien. In the court's view, the district
judge might have considered the violation of the 1965 Amendment as an
aggravating circumstance in imposing sentence. The Court of Appeals
subsequently denied O'Brien's petition for a rehearing, in which he argued
that he had not been charged, tried, or convicted for nonpossession, and that
nonpossession was not a lesser included offense of mutilation or destruction.
O'Brien v. United States, 376 F.2d 538, 542 (C.A.1st Cir. 1967).

7

United States v. Miller, 367 F.2d 72 (C.A.2d Cir. 1966), cert. denied, 386
U.S. 911, 87 S.Ct. 855, 17 L.Ed.2d 787 (1967).

8

Smith v. United States, 368 F.2d 529 (C.A.8th Cir. 1966).

9

See 62 Stat. 605, as amended, 65 Stat. 76, 50 U.S.C. App. § 453; 32 CFR §
1613.1 (1962).

10

32 CFR § 1621.2 (1962).

11

32 CFR § 1613.43a (1962).

12

32 CFR §§ 1621.9, 1623.1 (1962).

13

32 CFR §§ 1623.1, 1623.2 (1962).

14

32 CFR § 1623.4 (1962).

15

32 CFR § 1625.1 (1962).

16

32 CFR §§ 1625.1, 1625.2, 1625.3, 1625.4, and 1625.11 (1962).

17

32 CFR § 1625.12 (1962).

18

32 CFR § 1621.2 (1962).

19

32 CFR § 1617.1 (1962), provides, in relevant part:

'Every person required to present himself for and submit to registration must,
after he is registered, have in his personal possession at all times his
Registration Certificate (SSS Form No. 2) prepared by his local board which
has not been altered and on which no notation duly and validly inscribed
thereon has been changed in any manner after its preparation by the local
board. The failure of any person to have his Registration Certificate (SSS
Form No. 2) in his personal possession shall be prima facie evidence of his
failure to register.'

20

32 CFR § 1623.5 (1962), provides, in relevant part:

'Every person who has been classified by a local board must have in his
personal possession at all times, in addition to his Registration Certificate
(SSS Form No. 2), a valid Notice of Classification (SSS Form No. 110) issued
to him showing his current classification.'

21

See text, infra, at 382.

22

NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. 415, 438, 83 S.Ct. 328, 340, 9 L.Ed.2d 405 (1963);
see also Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398, 403, 83 S.Ct. 1790, 1793, 10
L.Ed.2d 965 (1963).

23

NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. 415, 444, 83 S.Ct. 328, 343, 9 L.Ed.2d 405 (1963);
NAACP v. State of Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U.S. 449, 464, 78 S.Ct. 1163,
2 L.Ed.2d 1488 (1958).

24

Bates v. City of Little Rock, 361 U.S. 516, 524, 80 S.Ct. 412, 417, 4 L.Ed.2d
480 (1960).

25

Thomas v. Collins, 323 U.S. 516, 530, 65 S.Ct. 315, 322, 89 L.Ed. 430 (1945);
see also Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398, 406, 83 S.Ct. 1790, 1795, 10
L.Ed.2d 965 (1963).

26

Bates v. City of Little Rock, 361 U.S. 516, 524, 80 S.Ct. 412, 417, 4 L.Ed.2d
480 (1960).

27

Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U.S. 398, 408, 83 S.Ct. 1790, 1796, 10 L.Ed.2d 965
(1963).

28

Cf. Milanovich v. United States, 365 U.S. 551, 81 S.Ct. 728, 5 L.Ed.2d 773
(1961); Heflin v. United States, 358 U.S. 415, 79 S.Ct. 451, 3 L.Ed.2d 407
(1959); Prince v. United States, 352 U.S. 322, 77 S.Ct. 403, 1 L.Ed.2d 370
(1957).

29

Cf. Milanovich v. United States, 365 U.S. 551, 81 S.Ct. 728, 5 L.Ed.2d 773
(1961); Heflin v. United States, 358 U.S. 415, 79 S.Ct. 451, 3 L.Ed.2d 407
(1959); Prince v. United States, 352 U.S. 322, 77 S.Ct. 403, 1 L.Ed.2d 370
(1957).

30

The Court may make the same assumption in a very limited and well-defined
class of cases where the very nature of the constitutional question requires
an inquiry into legislative purpose. The principal class of cases is readily
apparent--those in which statutes have been challenged as bills of attainder.
This Court's decisions have defined a bill of attainder as a legislative Act
which inflicts punishment on named individuals or members of an easily
ascertainable group without a judicial trial. In determining whether a
particular statute is a bill of attainder, the analysis necessarily requires
an inquiry into whether the three definitional elements--specificity in
identification, punishment, and lack of a judicial trial--are contained in the
statute. The inquiry into whether the challenged statute contains the
necessary element of punishment has on occasion led the Court to examine the
legislative motive in enacting the statute. See, e.g., United States v.
Lovett, 328 U.S. 303, 66 S.Ct. 1073, 90 L.Ed. 1252 (1946). Two other decisions
not involving a bill of attainder analysis contain an inquiry into legislative
purpose or motive of the type that O'Brien suggests we engage in in this case.
Kennedy v. Mendoza-Martinez, 372 U.S. 144, 169--184, 83 S.Ct. 554, 568--575, 9
L.Ed.2d 644 (1963); Trop v. Dulles, 356 U.S. 86, 95--97, 78 S.Ct. 590, 595--
596, 2 L.Ed.2d 630 (1958). The inquiry into legislative purpose or motive in
Kennedy and Trop, however, was for the same limited purpose as in the bill of
attainder decisions--i.e., to determine whether the statutes under review were
punitive in nature. We face no such inquiry in this case. The 1965 Amendment
to § 462(b) was clearly penal in nature, designed to impose criminal
punishment for designated acts.

31

The other issues briefed by O'Brien were not raised in the petition for
certiorari in No. 232 or in the cross-petition in No. 233. Accordingly, those
issues are not before the Court.

1

Neither of the decisions cited by the majority for the proposition that
Congress' power to conscript men into the armed services is "beyond question"
concerns peacetime conscription. As I have shown in my dissenting opinion in
Holmes v. United States, 391 U.S. 936, 88 S.Ct. 1835, 20 L.Ed.2d 856, the
Selective Draft Law Cases, 245 U.S. 366, 38 S.Ct. 159, 62 L.Ed. 349, decided
in 1918, upheld the constitutionality of a conscription act passed by Congress
more than a month after war had been declared on the German Empire and which
was then being enforced in time of war. Lichter v. United States, 334 U.S.
742, 68 S.Ct. 1294, 92 L.Ed. 1694, concerned the constitutionality of the
Renegotiation Act, another wartime measure, enacted by Congress over the
period of 1942--1945 (id., at 745, n. 1, 68 S.Ct. at 1297) and applied in that
case to excessive war profits made in 1942--1943 (id., at 753, 68 S.Ct. at
1300). War had been declared, of course, in 1941 (55 Stat. 795). The Court
referred to Congress' power to raise armies in discussing the 'background'
(334 U.S., at 753, 68 S.Ct., at 1300) of the Renegotiation Act, which it
upheld as a valid exercise of the War Power.

2

Today the Court also denies stays in Shiffman v. Selective Service Local Board
No. 5, 391 U.S. 930, 88 S.Ct. 1831, 20 L.Ed.2d 849, and Zigmond v. Selective
Service Local Board No. 16, 391 U.S. 930, 88 S.Ct. 1831, 20 L.Ed.2d 851, where
punitive delinquency regulations are invoked against registrants, decisions
that present a related question.

