437 U.S. 617

98 S.Ct. 2531

57 L.Ed.2d 475

CITY OF PHILADELPHIA et al., Appellants,  
v.  
State of NEW JERSEY et al.

No. 77-404.

Argued March 27, 1978.

Decided June 23, 1978.

_Syllabus_

New Jersey statute (ch. 363) that prohibits the importation of most "solid or
liquid waste which originated or was collected outside the territorial limits
of the State . . . " _held_ to violate the Commerce Clause of the United
States Constitution. Pp. 621-629.

(a) All objects of interstate trade merit Commerce Clause protection and none
is excluded from the definition of "commerce" at the outset; hence, contrary
to the suggestion of the court below, there can be no doubt that the banning
of "valueless" out-of-state wastes by ch. 363 implicates constitutional
protection. _Bowman v. Chicago & Northwestern R. Co.,_ 125 U.S. 465, 8 S.Ct.
689, 31 L.Ed. 700, distinguished. Pp. 621-623.

(b) The crucial inquiry here must be directed to determining whether ch. 363
is basically an economic protectionist measure, and thus virtually _per se_
invalid, or a law directed at legitimate local concerns that has only
incidental effects on interstate commerce. _Pike v. Bruce Church, Inc.,_ 397
U.S. 137, 142, 90 S.Ct. 844, 25 L.Ed.2d 174. Pp. 623-624.

(c) Since the evil of protectionism can reside in legislative means as well as
legislative ends, it is immaterial whether the legislative purpose of ch. 363
is to protect New Jersey's environment or its economy, for whatever the
purpose, it may not be accomplished by discriminating against articles of
commerce coming from outside the State unless there is some reason, apart from
their origin, to treat them differently. Both on its face and in its plain
effect ch. 363 violates this principle of nondiscrimination. A State may not
attempt to isolate itself from a problem common to many by erecting a barrier
against the movement of interstate trade, as ch. 363 seeks to do by imposing
on out-of-state commercial interests the full burden of conserving New
Jersey's remaining landfill space. Pp. 625-628.

(d) The New Jersey statute cannot be likened to a quarantine law which bans
importation of articles of commerce because of their innate harmfulness and
not because of their origin. Though New Jersey concedes that out-of-state
waste is no different from domestic waste, it has banned the former while
leaving its landfill sites open to the latter, thus trying to saddle those
outside the State with the entire burden of slowing the flow of wastes into
New Jersey's remaining landfill sites. Pp. 628-629.

73 N.J. 562, 376 A.2d 888, reversed.

Herbert F. Moore, Princeton, N. J., for appellants.

Stephen Skillman, Trenton, N. J., for appellees.

Mr. Justice STEWART delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

A New Jersey law prohibits the importation of most "solid or liquid waste
which originated or was collected outside the territorial limits of the State
. . .." In this case we are required to decide whether this statutory
prohibition violates the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution.

2

* The statutory provision in ques ion is ch. 363 of 1973 N.J. Laws, which took effect in early 1974. In pertinent part it provides:

3

"No person shall bring into this State any solid or liquid waste which
originated or was collected outside the territorial limits of the State,
except garbage to be fed to swine in the State of New Jersey, until the
commissioner [of the State Department of Environmental Protection] shall
determine that such action can be permitted without endangering the public
health, safety and welfare and has promulgated regulations permitting and
regulating the treatment and disposal of such waste in this State."
N.J.Stat.Ann. ยง 13:1I-10 (West Supp. 1978).1

4

As authorized by ch. 363, the Commissioner promulgated regulations permitting
four categories of waste to enter the State.2 Apart from these narrow
exceptions, however, New Jersey closed its borders to all waste from other
States.

5

Immediately affected by these developments were the operators of private
landfills in New Jersey, and several cities in other States that had
agreements with these operators for waste disposal. They brought suit against
New Jersey and its Department of Environmental Protection in state court,
attacking the statute and regulations on a number of state and federal
grounds. In an oral opinion granting the plaintiffs' motion for summary
judgment, the trial court declared the law unconstitutional because it
discriminated against interstate commerce. The New Jersey Supreme Court
consolidated this case with another reaching the same conclusion, Hackensack
Meadowlands Development Comm'n v. Municipal Sanitary Landfill Auth., 127
N.J.Super. 160, 316 A.2d 711, and reversed, 68 N.J. 451, 348 A.2d 505. It
found that ch. 363 advanced vital health and environmental objectives with no
economic discrimination against, and with little burden upon, interstate
commerce, and that the law was therefore permissible under the Commerce Clause
of the Constitution. The court also found no congressional intent to pre-empt
ch. 363 by enacting in 1965 the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 79 Stat. 997, 42
U.S.C. ยง 3251 _et seq._ , as amended by the Resource Recovery Act of 1970, 84
Stat. 1227.

6

The plaintiffs then appealed to this Court.3 After noting probable
jurisdiction, 425 U.S. 910, 96 S.Ct. 1504, 47 L.Ed.2d 760, and hearing oral
argume t, we remanded for reconsideration of the appellants' pre-emption claim
in light of the newly enacted Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976,
90 Stat. 2795. 430 U.S. 141, 97 S.Ct. 987, 51 L.Ed.2d 224. Again the New
Jersey Supreme Court found no federal pre-emption of the state law, 73 N.J.
562, 376 A.2d 888, and again we noted probable jurisdiction, 434 U.S. 964, 98
S.Ct. 501, 54 L.Ed.2d 448. We agree with the New Jersey court that the state
law has not been pre-empted by federal legislation.4 The dispositive question,
therefore, is whether the law is constitutionally permissible in light of the
Commerce Clause of the Constitution.5

II

7

Before it addressed the merits of the appellants' claim, the New Jersey
Supreme Court questioned whether the interstate movement of those wastes
banned by ch. 363 is "commerce" at all within the meaning of the Commerce
Clause. Any doubts on that score should be laid to rest at the outset.

8

The state court expressed the view that there may be two definitions of
"commerce" for constitutional purposes. When relied on "to support some
exertion of federal control or regulation," the Commerce Clause permits "a
very sweeping concept" of commerce. 68 N.J., at 469, 348 A.2d, at 514. But
when relied on "to strike down or restrict state legislation," that Clause and
the term "commerce" have a "much more confined . . . reach." _Ibid._

9

The state court reached this conclusion in an attempt to reconcile modern
Commerce Clause concepts with several old cases of this Court holding that
States can prohibit the importation of some objects because they "are not
legitimate subjects of trade and commerce." _Bowman v. Chicago & Northwestern
R. Co.,_ 125 U.S. 465, 489, 8 S.Ct. 689, 700, 31 L.Ed. 700. These articles
include items "which, on account of their existing condition, would bring in
and spread disease, pestilence, and death, such as rags or other substances
infect d with the germs of yellow fever or the virus of small-pox, or cattle
or meat or other provisions that are diseased or decayed, or otherwise, from
their condition and quality, unfit for human use or consumption." _Ibid._ See
also _Baldwin v. G. A. F. Seelig, Inc.,_ 294 U.S. 511, 525, 55 S.Ct. 497, 501,
79 L.Ed. 1032 and cases cited therein. The state court found that ch. 363 as
narrowed by the state regulations, see n. 2, _supra,_ banned only "those
wastes which can[not] be put to effective use," and therefore those wastes
were not commerce at all, unless "the mere transportation and disposal of
valueless waste between states constitutes interstate commerce within the
meaning of the constitutional provision." 68 N.J., at 468, 348 A.2d, at 514.

10

We think the state court misread our cases, and thus erred in assuming that
they require a two-tiered definition of commerce. In saying that innately
harmful articles "are not legitimate subjects of trade and commerce," the
_Bowman_ Court was stating its conclusion, not the starting point of its
reasoning. All objects of interstate trade merit Commerce Clause protection;
none is excluded by definition at the outset. In _Bowman_ and similar cases,
the Court held simply that because the articles' worth in interstate commerce
was far outweighed by the dangers inhering in their very movement, States
could prohibit their transportation across state lines. Hence, we reject the
state court's suggestion that the banning of "valueless" out-of-state wastes
by ch. 363 implicates no constitutional protection. Just as Congress has power
to regulate the interstate movement of these wastes, States are not free from
constitutional scrutiny when they restrict that movement. Cf. _Hughes v.
Alexandria Scrap Corp.,_ 426 U.S. 794, 802-814, 96 S.Ct. 2488, 2494-2500, 49
L.Ed.2d 220; _Meat Drivers v. United States,_ 371 U.S. 94, 83 S.Ct. 162, 9
L.Ed.2d 150.

III

A.

11

Although the Constitution gives Congress the power to regulate commerce among
the States, many subjects of potential federal regulation under that power
inevitably escape congressional attention "because of their local character
and their number and diversity." _South Carolina State Highway Dept. v.
Barnwell Bros., Inc._ , 303 U.S. 177, 185, 58 S.Ct. 510, 513, 82 L.Ed. 734. In
the absence of federal legislation, these subjects are open to control by the
States so long as they act within the restraints imposed by the Commerce
Clause itself. See _Raymond Motor Transportation, Inc. v. Rice_ , 434 U.S.
429, 440, 98 S.Ct. 787, 793, 794, 54 L.Ed.2d 664. The bounds of these
restraints appear nowhere in the words of the Commerce Clause, but have
emerged gradually in the decisions of this Court giving effect to its basic
purpose. That broad purpose was well expressed by Mr. Justice Jackson in his
opinion for the Court in _H. P. Hood & Sons, Inc. v. Du Mond_, 336 U.S. 525,
537-538, 69 S.Ct. 657, 665, 93 L.Ed. 865:

12

"This principle that our economic unit is the Nation, which alone has the
gamut of powers necessary to control of the economy, including the vital power
of erecting customs barriers against foreign competition, has as its corollary
that the states are not separable economic units. As the Court said in
_Baldwin v. Seelig_ , 294 U.S. 511, 527, 55 S.Ct. 497, 79 L.Ed. 1032, 38
A.L.R. 286, 'what is ultimate is the principle that one state in its dealings
with another may not place itself in a position of economic isolation.' "

13

The opinions of the Court through the years have reflected an alertness to the
evils of "economic isolation" and protectionism, while at the same time
recognizing that incidental burdens on interstate commerce may be unavoidable
when a State legislates to safeguard the health and safety of its people.
Thus, where simple economic protectionism is effected by state legislation, a
virtually _per se_ rule of invalidity has been erected. See, _e. g., H. P.
Hood & Sons, Inc. v. Du Mond, supra; Too er v. Witsell_, 334 U.S. 385,
403-406, 68 S.Ct. 1156, 1165-1167, 92 L.Ed. 1460; _Baldwin v. G. A. F. Seelig,
Inc., supra; Buck v. Kuykendall_ , 267 U.S. 307, 315-316, 45 S.Ct. 324,
325-326, 69 L.Ed. 623. The clearest example of such legislation is a law that
overtly blocks the flow of interstate commerce at a State's borders. Cf.
_Welton v. Missouri_ , 91 U.S. 275, 23 L.Ed. 347. But where other legislative
objectives are credibly advanced and there is no patent discrimination against
interstate trade, the Court has adopted a much more flexible approach, the
general contours of which were outlined in _Pike v. Bruce Church, Inc._ , 397
U.S. 137, 142, 90 S.Ct. 844, 847, 25 L.Ed.2d 174:

14

"Where the statute regulates evenhandedly to effectuate a legitimate local
public interest, and its effects on interstate commerce are only incidental,
it will be upheld unless the burden imposed on such commerce is clearly
excessive in relation to the putative local benefits. . . . If a legitimate
local purpose is found, then the question becomes one of degree. And the
extent of the burden that will be tolerated will of course depend on the
nature of the local interest involved, and on whether it could be promoted as
well with a lesser impact on interstate activities."

15

See also _Raymond Motor Transportation, Inc. v. Rice, supra_ , 437 U.S., at
441-442, 98 S.Ct., at 787; _Hunt v. Washington Apple Advertising Comm'n_ , 432
U.S. 333, 352-354, 97 S.Ct. 2434, 2446-2447, 53 L.Ed.2d 383; _Great A & P Tea
Co. v. Cottrell_, 424 U.S. 366, 371-372, 96 S.Ct. 923, 927-928, 47 L.Ed.2d 55.

16

The crucial inquiry, therefore, must be directed to determining whether ch.
363 is basically a protectionist measure, or whether it can fairly be viewed
as a law directed to legitimate local concerns, with effects upon interstate
commerce that are only incidental.

B

17

The purpose of ch. 363 is set out in the statute itself as follows:

18

"The Legislature finds and determines that . . . the volume of solid and
liquid waste continues to rapidly increase, that the treatment and disposal of
these wastes continues to pose an even greater threat to the quality of the
environment of New Jersey, that the available and appropriate land fill sites
within the State are being diminished, that the environment continues to be
threatened by the treatment and disposal of waste which originated or was
collected outside the State, and that the public health, safety and welfare
require that the treatment and disposal within this State of all wastes
generated outside of the State be prohibited."

19

The New Jersey Supreme Court accepted this statement of the state
legislature's purpose. The state court additionally found that New Jersey's
existing landfill sites will be exhausted within a few years; that to go on
using these sites or to develop new ones will take a heavy environmental toll,
both from pollution and from loss of scarce open lands; that new techniques to
divert waste from landfills to other methods of disposal and resource recovery
processes are under development, but that these changes will require time; and
finally, that "the extension of the lifespan of existing landfills, resulting
from the exclusion of out-of-state waste, may be of crucial importance in
preventing further virgin wetlands or other undeveloped lands from being
devoted to landfill purposes." 68 N.J., at 460-465, 348 A.2d, at 509-512.
Based on these findings, the court concluded that ch. 363 was designed to
protect, not the State's economy, but its environment, and that its
substantial benefits outweigh its "slight" burden on interstate commerce.
_Id._ , at 471-478, 348 A.2d, at 515-519.

20

The appellants strenuously contend that ch. 363, "while outwardly cloaked 'in
the currently fashionable garb of environmental protection,' . . . is actually
no more than a legislative effort to suppress competition and stabilize the
cost of solid waste disposal for New Jersey residents . . .." They cite
passages of legislative history suggesting that the problem addressed by ch.
363 is primarily financial: Stemming the flow of out-of-state waste into
certain landfill sites will extend their lives, thus delaying the day when New
Jersey cities must transport their waste to more distant and expensive sites.

21

The appellees, on the other hand, deny that ch. 363 was motivated by financial
concerns or economic protectionism. In the words of their brief, "[n]o New
Jersey commercial interests stand to gain advantage over competitors from
outside the state as a result of the ban on dumping out-of-state waste."
Noting that New Jersey landfill operators are among the plaintiffs, the
appellee's brief argues that "[t]he complaint is not that New Jersey has
forged an economic preference for its own commercial interests, but rather
that it has denied a small group of its entrepreneurs an economic opportunity
to traffic in waste in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizenry at large."

22

This dispute about ultimate legislative purpose need not be resolved, because
its resolution would not be relevant to the constitutional issue to be decided
in this case. Contrary to the evident assumption of the state court and the
parties, the evil of protectionism can reside in legislative means as well as
legislative ends. Thus, it does not matter whether the ultimate aim of ch. 363
is to reduce the waste disposal costs of New Jersey residents or to save
remaining open lands from pollution, for we assume New Jersey has every right
to protect its residents' pocketbooks as well as their environment. And it may
be assumed as well that New Jersey may pursue those ends by slowing the flow
of _all_ waste into the State's remaining landfills, even though interstate
commerce may incidentally be affected. But whatever New Jersey's ultimate
purpose, it may not be accomplished by discriminating against articles of
commerce coming from outside the State unless there is some reason, apart from
their origin, to treat them differently. Both on its face and in its plain
effect, ch. 363 violates this principle of nondiscrimination.

23

The Court has consistently found parochial legislation of this kind to be
constitutionally invalid, whether the ultimate aim of the legislation was to
assure a steady supply of milk by erecting barriers to allegedly ruinous
outside competition, _Baldwin v. G. A. F. Seelig, Inc.,_ 294 U.S., at 522-524,
55 S.Ct., at 500, or to create jobs by keeping industry within the State,
_Foster-Fountain Packing Co. v. Haydel_ , 278 U.S. 1, 10, 49 S.Ct. 1, 3, 73
L.Ed. 147; _Johnson v. Haydel_ , 278 U.S. 16, 49 S.Ct. 6, 73 L.Ed. 155;
_Toomer v. Witsell_ , 334 U.S., at 403-404, 68 S.Ct., at 1166; or to preserve
the State's financial resources from depletion by fencing out indigent
immigrants, _Edwards v. California_ , 314 U.S. 160, 173-174, 62 S.Ct. 164,
166-167, 86 L.Ed. 119. In each of these cases, a presumably legitimate goal
was sought to be achieved by the illegitimate means of isolating the State
from the national economy.

24

Also relevant here are the Court's decisions holding that a State may not
accord its own inhabitants a preferred right of access over consumers in other
States to natural resources located within its borders. _West, Attorney
General of Oklahoma v. Kansas Natural Gas Co._ , 221 U.S. 229, 31 S.Ct. 564,
55 L.Ed. 716; _Pennsylvania v. West Virginia_ , 262 U.S. 553, 43 S.Ct. 658, 67
L.Ed. 1117. These cases stand for the basic principle that a "State is without
power to prevent privately owned articles of trade from being shipped and sold
in interstate commerce on the ground that they are required to satisfy local
demands or because they are needed by the people of the State."6 _Foster-
Fountain Packing Co. v. Haydel, supra_ , 278 U.S. at 10, 49 S.Ct. at 4. The
New Jersey law at issue in this case falls squarely within the area that the
Commerce Clause puts off limits to state regulation. On its face, it imposes
on out-of-state commercial interests the full burden of conserving the State's
remaining landfill space. It is true that in our previous cases the scarce
natural resource was itself the article of commerce, whereas here the scarce
resource and the article of commerce are distinct. But that difference is
without consequence. In both instances, the State has overtly moved to slow or
freeze the flow of commerce for protectionist reasons. It does not matter that
the State has shut the article of commerce inside the State in one case and
outside the State in the other. What is crucial is the attempt by one State to
isolate itself from a problem common to many by erecting a barrier against the
movement of interstate trade.

25

The appellees argue that not all laws which facially discriminate against out-
of-state commerce are forbidden protectionist regulations. In particular, they
point to quarantine laws, which this Court has repeatedly upheld even though
they appear to single out interstate commerce for special treatment. See
_Baldwin v. G. A. F. Seelig, Inc., supra_ , 294 U.S., at 525, 55 S.Ct., at
501; _Bowman v. Chicago & Northwestern R. Co._, 125 U.S., at 489, 8 S.Ct., at
700. In the appellees' view, ch. 363 is analogous to such health-protective
measures, since it reduces the exposure of New Jersey residents to the
allegedly harmful effects of landfill sites.

26

It is true that certain quarantine laws have not been considered forbidden
protectionist measures, even though they were directed against out-of-state
commerce. See _Asbell v. Kansas_ , 209 U.S. 251, 28 S.Ct. 485, 52 L.Ed. 778;
_Reid v. Colorado_ , 187 U.S. 137, 23 S.Ct. 92, 47 L.Ed. 108; _Bowman v.
Chicago & Northwestern R. Co._, 125 U.S., at 489, 8 S.Ct., at 700. But those
quarantine laws banned the importation of articles such as diseased livestock
that required destruction as soon as possible because their very movement
risked contagion and other evils. Those laws thus did not discriminate against
interstate commerce as such, but simply prevented traffic in noxious articles,
whatever their origin.

27

The New Jersey statute is not such a quarantine law. There has been no claim
here that the very movement of waste into or through New Jersey endangers
health, or that waste must be disposed of as soon and as close to its point of
generation as possible. The harms caused by waste are said to arise after its
disposal in landfill sites, and at that point, as New Jersey concedes, there
is no basis to distinguish out-of-state waste from domestic waste. If one is
inherently harmful, so is the other. Yet New Jersey has banned the former
while leaving its landfill sites open to the latter. The New Jersey law blocks
the importation of waste in an obvious effort to saddle those outside the
State with the entire burden of slowing the flow of refuse into New Jersey's
remaining landfill sites. That legislative effort is clearly impermissible
under the Commerce Clause of the Constitution.

28

Today, cities in Pennsylvania and New York find it expedient or necessary to
send their waste into New Jersey for disposal, and New Jersey claims the right
to close its borders to such traffic. Tomorrow, cities in New Jersey may find
it expedient or necessary to send their waste into Pennsylvania or New York
for disposal, and those States might then claim the right to close their
borders. The Commerce Clause will protect New Jersey in the future, just as it
protects her neighbors now, from efforts by one State to isolate itself in the
stream of interstate commerce from a problem shared by all. The judgment is

29

_Reversed_.

30

Mr. Justice REHNQUIST, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE joins, dissenting.

31

A growing problem in our Nation is the sanitary treatment and disposal of
solid waste.1 For many years, solid waste was incinerated. Because of the
significant environmental problems attendant on incineration, however, this
method of solid waste disposal has declined in use in many localities,
including New Jersey. "Sanitary" landfills have replaced incineration as the
principal method of disposing of solid waste. In ch. 363 of the 1973 N.J.
Laws, the State of New Jersey legislatively recognized the unfortunate fact
that landfills also present extremely serious health and safety problems.
First, in New Jersey, "virtually all sanitary landfills can be expected to
produce leachate, a noxious and highly polluted liquid which is seldom visible
and frequently pollutes . . . ground and surface waters." App. 149. The
natural decomposition process which occurs in landfills also produces large
quantities of methane and thereby presents a significant explosion hazard.
_Id._ , at 149, 156-157. Landfills can also generate "health hazards caused by
rodents, fires and scavenger birds" and, "needless to say, do not help New
Jersey's aesthetic appearance nor New Jersey's noise or water or air pollution
problems." Supp.App. 5.

32

The health and safety hazards associated with landfills present appellees with
a currently unsolvable dilemma. Other, hopefully safer, methods of disposing
of solid wastes are still in the development stage and cannot presently be
used. But appellees obviously cannot completely stop the tide of solid waste
that its citizens will produce in the interim. For the moment, therefore,
appellees must continue to use sanitary landfills to dispose of New Jersey's
own solid waste despite the critical environmental problems thereby created.

33

The question presented in this case is whether New Jersey must also continue
to receive and dispose of solid waste from neighboring States, even though
these will inexorably increase the health problems discussed above.2 The Court
answers this question in the affirmative. New Jersey must either prohibit
_all_ landfill operations, leaving itself to cast about for a presently
nonexistent solution to the serious problem of disposing of the waste
generated within its own borders, or it must accept waste from every portion
of the United States, thereby multiplying the health and safety problems which
would result if it dealt only with such wastes generated within the State.
Because past precedents establish that the Commerce Clause does not present
appellees with such a Hobson's choice, I dissent.

34

The Court recognizes, _ante_ , at 621-622, that States can prohibit the
importation of items " 'which, on account of their existing condition, would
bring in and spread disease, pestilence, and death, such as rags or other
substances infected with the germs of yellow fever or the virus of small-pox,
or cattle or meat or other provisions that are diseased or decayed or
otherwise, from their condition and quality, unfit for human use or
consumption.' " _Bowman v. Chicago & Northwestern R. Co._, 125 U.S. 465, 489,
8 S.Ct. 689, 700, 31 L.Ed. 700 (1888). See _Baldwin v. G. A. F. Seelig, Inc._
, 294 U.S. 511, 525, 55 S.Ct. 497, 501, 79 L.Ed. 1032 (1935); _Sligh v.
Kirkwood_ , 237 U.S. 52, 59-60, 35 S.Ct. 501, 502, 59 L.Ed. 835 (1915);
_Asbell v. Kansas_ , 209 U.S. 251, 28 S.Ct. 485, 52 L.Ed. 778 (1908);
_Railroad Co. v. Husen_ , 95 U.S. 465, 472, 24 L.Ed. 527 (1878). As the Court
points out, such "quarantine laws have not been considered forbidden
protectionist measures, _even though they were directed against out-of-state
commerce_." _Ante_ , at 628 (emphasis added).

35

In my opinion, these cases are dispositive of the present one. Under them, New
Jersey may require germ-infected rags or diseased meat to be disposed of as
best as possible within the State, but at the same time prohibit the
_importation_ of such items for disposal at the facilities that are set up
within New Jersey for disposal of such material generated _within_ the State.
The physical fact of life that New Jersey must somehow dispose of its own
noxious items does not mean that it must serve as a depository for those of
every other State. Similarly, New Jersey should be free under our past
precedents to prohibit the importation of solid waste because of the health
and safety problems that such waste poses to its citizens. The fact that New
Jersey continues to, and indeed must continue to, dispose of its own solid
waste does not mean that New Jersey may not prohibit the importation of even
more solid waste into the State. I simply see no way to distinguish solid
waste, on the record of this case, from germ-infected rags, diseased meat, and
other noxious items.

36

The Court's effort to distinguish these prior cases is unconvincing. It first
asserts that the quarantine laws which have previously been upheld "banned the
importation of articles such as diseased livestock that required destruction
as soon as possible because their very movement risked contagion and other
evils." _Ante_ , at 628-629. According to the Court, the New Jersey law is
distinguishable from these other laws, and invalid, because the concern of New
Jersey is not with the _movement_ of solid waste but with the present
inability to safely _dispose_ of it once it reaches its destination. But I
think it far from clear that the State's law has as limited a focus as the
Court imputes to it: Solid waste which is a health hazard when it reaches its
destination may in all likelihood be an equally great health hazard in
transit.

37

Even if the Court is correct in its characterization of New Jersey's concerns,
I do not see why a State may ban the importation of items whose movement risks
contagion, but cannot ban the importation of items which, although they may be
transported into the State without undue hazard, will then simply pile up in
an ever increasing danger to the public's health and safety. The Commerce
Clause was not drawn with a view to having the validity of state laws turn on
such pointless distinctions.

38

Second, the Court implies that the challenged laws must be invalidated because
New Jersey has left its landfills open to domestic waste. But, as the Court
notes, _ante_ , at 628, this Court has repeatedly upheld quarantine laws "even
though they appear o single out interstate commerce for special treatment."
The fact that New Jersey has left its landfill sites open for domestic waste
does not, of course, mean that solid waste is not innately harmful. Nor does
it mean that New Jersey prohibits importation of solid waste for reasons other
than the health and safety of its population. New Jersey must out of sheer
necessity treat and dispose of its solid waste in some fashion, just as it
must treat New Jersey cattle suffering from hoof-and-mouth disease. It does
not follow that New Jersey must, under the Commerce Clause, accept solid waste
or diseased cattle from outside its borders and thereby exacerbate its
problems.

39

The Supreme Court of New Jersey expressly found that ch. 363 was passed "to
preserve the health of New Jersey residents by keeping their exposure to solid
waste and landfill areas to a minimum." 68 N.J. 451, 473, 348 A.2d 505, 516.
The Court points to absolutely no evidence that would contradict this finding
by the New Jersey Supreme Court. Because I find no basis for distinguishing
the laws under challenge here from our past cases upholding state laws that
prohibit the importation of items that could endanger the population of the
State, I dissent.

1

New Jersey enacted a Waste Control Act, N.J.Stat.Ann. ยง 13:1I-1 _et seq._
(West Supp. 1978), in early 1973. This Act empowered the State Commissioner of
Environmental Protection to promulgate rules banning the movement of solid
waste into the State. Within a year, the state legislature enacted ch. 363,
which reversed the presumption and blocked the importation of all categories
of waste unless excepted by rules of the Commissioner.

2

Effective as of February 1974, these regulations provided as follows:

"(a) No person shall bring into this State, or accept for disposal in this
State, any solid or liquid waste which originated or was collected outside the
territorial limits of this State. This Section shall not apply to:

"1. Garbage to be fed to swine in the State of New Jersey;

"2. Any separated waste material, including newsprint, paper, glass and
metals, that is free from putrescible materials and not mixed with other solid
or liquid waste that is intended for a recycling or reclamation facility;

"3. Municipal solid waste to be separated or processed into usable secondary
materials, including fuel and heat, at a resource recovery facility provided
that not less than 70 per cent of the thru-put of any such facility is to be
separated or processed into usable secondary materials; and

"4. Pesticides, hazardous waste, chemical waste, bulk liquid, bulk semi-
liquid, which is to be treated, processed or recovered in a solid waste
disposal facility which is registered with the Department for such treatment,
processing or recovery, other than by disposal on or in the lands of this
State." N.J.Admin.Code 7:1-4.2 (Supp. 1977).

3

The decision of the New Jersey Supreme Court disposed of the appellants' pre-
emption and Commerce Clause claims, but remanded the case to the trial court
for further proceedings on the other claims. The appellants then dismissed
with prejudice the other counts in their complaint so that there would be a
final judgment from which they could appeal to this Court.

4

The surviving provisions of the 1965 Solid Waste Disposal Act, 79 Stat. 997,
the Resource Recovery Act of 1970, 84 Stat. 1227, and the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 90 Stat. 2795, are now codified as the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, found at 42 U.S.C. ยง 6901 _et seq._ (1976 ed.).

From our review of this federal legislation, we find no "clear and manifest
purpose of Congress," _Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp.,_ 331 U.S. 218, 230, 67
S.Ct. 1146, 1152, 91 L.Ed. 1447, to pre-empt the entire field of interstate
waste management or transportation, either by express statutory command, see
_Jones v. Rath Packing Co.,_ 430 U.S. 519, 530-531, 97 S.Ct. 1305, 1311-1312,
51 L.Ed.2d 604 or by implicit legislative design, see _City of Burbank v.
Lockheed Air Terminal,_ 411 U.S. 624, 633, 93 S.Ct. 1854, 36 L.Ed.2d 547. To
the contrary, Congress expressly has provided that "the collection and
disposal of solid wastes should continue to be primarily the function of
State, regional, and local agencies . . .." 42 U.S.C. ยง 6901(a)(4) (1976 ed.).
Similarly, ch. 363 is not pre-empted because of a square conflict with
particular provisions of federal law or because of general incompatibility
with basic federal objectives. See _Ray v. Atlantic Richfield Co.,_ 435 U.S.
151, 158, 98 S.Ct. 988, 995, 55 L.Ed.2d 179; _Jones v. Rath Packing Co.,
supra,_ 430 U.S. at 540-541, 97 S.Ct. at 1316. In short, we agree with the New
Jersey Supreme Court that ch. 363 can be enforced consistently with the
program goals and the respective federal-state roles intended by Congress when
it enacted the federal legislation.

5

U.S.Const., Art. I, ยง 8, cl. 3.

6

We express no opinion about New Jersey's power, consistent with the Commerce
Clause, to restrict to state residents access to state-owned resources,
compare _Douglas v. Seacoast Products, Inc._ , 431 U.S. 265, 283-287, 97 S.Ct.
1740, 1750-1753, 52 L.Ed.2d 304, with _id._ , at 287-290, 97 S.Ct., at
1753-1754 (REHNQUIST, J., concurring and dissenting); _Toomer v. Witsell_ ,
334 U.S. 385, 404, 68 S.Ct. 1156, 1166, 92 L.Ed. 1460, or New Jersey's power
to spend state funds solely on behalf of state residents and businesses,
compare _Hughes v. Alexandria Scrap Corp._ , 426 U.S. 794, 805-810, 96 S.Ct.
2488, 2495-2498, 49 L.Ed.2d 220; _id._ , at 815, 96 S.Ct. at 2500 (STEVENS,
J., concurring) with _id._ , at 817, 96 S.Ct., at 2501 (BRENNAN, J.,
dissenting). Also compare _South Carolina State Highway Dept. v. Barnwell
Bros., Inc._ , 303 U.S. 177, 187, 58 S.Ct. 510, 514, 82 L.Ed. 734, with
_Southern Pacific Co. v. Arizona ex rel. Sullivan_ , 325 U.S. 761, 783, 65
S.Ct. 1515, 1527, 89 L.Ed. 1915.

1

Congress specifically recognized the substantial dangers to the environment
and public health that are posed by current methods of disposing of solid
waste in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 90 Stat. 2795. As
the Court recognizes, _ante_ , at 621, n. 4, the laws under challenge here
"can be enforced consistently with the program goals and the respective
federal-state roles intended by Congress when it enacted" this and other
legislation and are thus not pre-empted by any federal statutes.

2

Regulations of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection "except
from the ban on out-of-state refuse those types of solid waste which may have
a value for recycling or for use as fuel." App. 47. Thus, the ban under
challenge would appear to be strictly limited to that waste which will be
disposed of in sanitary landfills and thereby pose health and safety dangers
to the citizens of New Jersey.

