500 U.S. 173

111 S.Ct. 1759

114 L.Ed.2d 233

Irving RUST, etc., et al., Petitioners,  
v.  
Louis W. SULLIVAN, Secretary of Health and Human Services. NEW YORK, et al.,
Petitioners, v. Louis W. SULLIVAN, Secretary of Health and Human Services.

Nos. 89-1391, 89-1392.

Argued Oct. 30, 1990.

Decided May 23, 1991.

_Syllabus_

Section 1008 of the Public Health Service Act specifies that none of the
federal funds appropriated under the Act's Title X for family-planning
services "shall be used in programs where abortion is a method of family
planning." In 1988, respondent Secretary of Health and Human Services issued
new regulations that, _inter alia,_ prohibit Title X projects from engaging in
counseling concerning, referrals for, and activities advocating abortion as a
method of family planning, and require such projects to maintain an objective
integrity and independence from the prohibited abortion activities by the use
of separate facilities, personnel, and accounting records. Before the
regulations could be applied, petitioners--Title X grantees and doctors who
supervise Title X funds--filed suits, which were consolidated, challenging the
regulations' facial validity and seeking declaratory and injunctive relief to
prevent their implementation. In affirming the District Court's grant of
summary judgment to the Secretary, the Court of Appeals held that the
regulations were a permissible construction of the statute and consistent with
the First and Fifth Amendments.

_Held:_

1\. The regulations are a permissible construction of Title X. Pp. 183-191.

(a) Because § 1008 is ambiguous in that it does not speak directly to the
issues of abortion counseling, referral, and advocacy, or to "program
integrity," the Secretary's construction must be accorded substantial
deference as the interpretation of the agency charged with administering the
statute, and may not be disturbed as an abuse of discretion if it reflects a
plausible construction of the statute's plain language and does not otherwise
conflict with Congress' expressed intent. _Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural
Resources Defense Council, Inc.,_ 467 U.S. 837, 842-844, 104 S.Ct. 2778,
2781-2782, 81 L.Ed.2d 694. P. 184.

(b) Title X's broad language plainly allows the abortion counseling, referral,
and advocacy regulations. Since the Title neither defines § 1008's "method of
family planning" phrase nor enumerates what types of medical and counseling
services are entitled to funding, it cannot be said that the Secretary's
construction of the § 1008 prohibition to require a ban on such activities
within Title X projects is impermissible. Moreover, since the legislative
history is ambiguous as to Congress' intent on these issues, this Court will
defer to the Secretary's expertise. Petitioners' contention, that the
regulations are entitled to little or no deference because they reverse the
Secretary's longstanding policy permitting nondirective counseling and
referral for abortion, is rejected. Because an agency must be given ample
latitude to adapt its rules to changing circumstances, a revised
interpretation may deserve deference. The Secretary's change of interpretation
is amply supported by a "reasoned analysis" indicating that the new
regulations are more in keeping with the statute's original intent, are
justified by client experience under the prior policy, and accord with a shift
in attitude against the "elimination of unborn children by abortion." Pp.
184-187.

(c) The regulations' "program integrity" requirements are not inconsistent
with Title X's plain language. The Secretary's view, that the requirements are
necessary to ensure that Title X grantees apply federal funds only to
authorized purposes and avoid creating the appearance of governmental support
for abortion-related activities, is not unreasonable in light of § 1008's
express prohibitory language and is entitled to deference. Petitioners'
contention is unpersuasive that the requirements frustrate Congress' intent,
clearly expressed in the Act and the legislative history, that Title X
programs be an integral part of a broader, comprehensive, health-care system
that envisions the efficient use of non-Title X funds. The statements relied
on are highly generalized and do not directly address the scope of § 1008 and,
therefore, cannot form the basis for enjoining the regulations. Indeed, the
legislative history demonstrates that Congress intended that Title X funds be
kept separate and distinct from abortion-related activities. Moreover, there
is no need to invalidate the regulations in order to save the statute from
unconstitutionality, since petitioners' constitutional arguments do not carry
the day. Pp. 187-191.

2\. The regulations do not violate the First Amendment free speech rights of
private Title X fund recipients, their staffs, or their patients by
impermissibly imposing viewpoint-discriminatory conditions on Government
subsidies. There is no question but that § 1008's prohibition is
constitutional, since the Government may make a value judgment favoring
childbirth over abortion, and implement that judgment by the allocation of
public funds. _Maher v. Roe,_ 432 U.S. 464, 474, 97 S.Ct. 2376, 2382, 53
L.Ed.2d 484. In so doing, the Government has not discriminated on the basis of
viewpoint; it has merely chosen to fund one activity to the exclusion of
another. Similarly, in implementing the statutory prohibition by forbidding
counseling, referral, and the provision of information regarding abortion as a
method of family planning, the regulations simply ensure that appropriated
funds are not used for activities, including speech, that are outside the
federal program's scope. _Arkansas Writers' Project, Inc. v. Ragland,_ 481
U.S. 221, 107 S.Ct. 1722, 95 L.Ed.2d 209, distinguished. Petitioners' view
that if the Government chooses to subsidize one protected right, it must
subsidize analogous counterpart rights, has been soundly rejected. See, _e.g.,
Regan v. Taxation With Representation of Wash.,_ 461 U.S. 540, 103 S.Ct. 1997,
76 L.Ed.2d 129. On their face, the regulations cannot be read, as petitioners
contend, to bar abortion referral or counseling where a woman's life is placed
in imminent peril by her pregnancy, since it does not seem that such
counseling could be considered a "method of family planning" under § 1008, and
since provisions of the regulations themselves contemplate that a Title X
project could engage in otherwise prohibited abortion-related activities in
such circumstances. Nor can the regulations' restrictions on the subsidization
of abortion-related speech be held to unconstitutionally condition the receipt
of a benefit, Title X funding, on the relinquishment of a constitutional
right, the right to engage in abortion advocacy and counseling. The
regulations do not force the Title X _grantee,_ or its employees, to give up
abortion-related speech; they merely require that such activities be kept
separate and distinct from the activities of the Title X _project. FCC v.
League of Women Voters of Cal.,_ 468 U.S. 364, 400, 104 S.Ct. 3106, 3127, 82
L.Ed.2d 278; _Regan, supra,_ 461 U.S., at 546, 103 S.Ct., at 2001,
distinguished. Although it could be argued that the traditional doctor-patient
relationship should enjoy First Amendment protection from Government
regulation, even when subsidized by the Government, cf., _e.g., United States
v. Kokinda,_ 497 U.S. ----, ----, 110 S.Ct. 3115, ----, 111 L.Ed.2d 571, that
question need not be resolved here, since the Title X program regulations do
not significantly impinge on the doctor-patient relationship. Pp. 192-200.

3\. The regulations do not violate a woman's Fifth Amendment right to choose
whether to terminate her pregnancy. The Government has no constitutional duty
to subsidize an activity merely because it is constitutionally protected and
may validly choose to allocate public funds for medical services relating to
childbirth but not to abortion. _Webster v. Reproductive Health Services,_ 492
U.S. 490, ----, 109 S.Ct. 3040, ----, 106 L.Ed.2d 410. That allocation places
no governmental obstacle in the path of a woman wishing to terminate her
pregnancy and leaves her with the same choices as if the Government had chosen
not to fund family-planning services at all. See, _e.g., Harris v. McRae,_ 448
U.S. 297, 315, 317, 100 S.Ct. 2671, 2687, 2688, 65 L.Ed.2d 784; _Webster,
supra,_ 492 U.S. at ----, 109 S.Ct. at ----. Nor do the regulations place
restrictions on the patient/doctor dialogue which violate a woman's right to
make an informed and voluntary choice under _Akron v. Akron Center for
Reproductive Health, Inc.,_ 462 U.S. 416, 103 S.Ct. 2481, 76 L.Ed.2d 687, and
_Thornburg v. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,_ 476 U.S.
747, 106 S.Ct. 2169, 90 L.Ed.2d 779. Unlike the laws invalidated in those
cases, which required _all_ doctors to provide _all_ pregnant patients
contemplating abortion with specific antiabortion information, here, a
doctor's ability to provide, and a woman's right to receive, abortion-related
information remains unfettered outside the context of the Title X project. The
fact that most Title X clients may be effectively precluded by indigency from
seeing a health-care provider for abortion-related services does not affect
the outcome here, since the financial constraints on such a woman's ability to
enjoy the full range of constitutionally protected freedom of choice are the
product not of governmental restrictions, but of her indigency. _McRae,
supra,_ 448 U.S. at 316, 100 S.Ct., at 2687. Pp. 201-203.

889 F.2d 401 (C.A.2 1989), affirmed.

REHNQUIST, C.J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which WHITE, KENNEDY,
SCALIA, and SOUTER, JJ., joined. BLACKMUN, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in
which MARSHALL, J., joined; in Part I of which O'CONNOR, J., joined; and in
Parts II and III of which STEVENS, J., joined. STEVENS, J., and O'CONNOR, J.,
filed dissenting opinions.

Laurence H. Tribe, Cambridge, Mass., for petitioners.

Solicitor Gen. Kenneth W. Starr, Washington, D.C., for respondent.

Chief Justice REHNQUIST delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

These cases concern a facial challenge to Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) regulations which limit the ability of Title X fund recipients
to engage in abortion-related activities. The United States Court of Appeals
for the Second Circuit upheld the regulations, finding them to be a
permissible construction of the statute as well as consistent with the First
and Fifth Amendments of the Constitution. We granted certiorari to resolve a
split among the Courts of Appeals.1 We affirm.

2

* A.

3

In 1970, Congress enacted Title X of the Public Health Service Act (Act), 84
stat. 1506, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 300-300a-6, which provides federal
funding for family-planning services. The Act authorizes the Secretary to
"make grants to and enter into contracts with public or nonprofit private
entities to assist in the establishment and operation of voluntary family
planning projects which shall offer a broad range of acceptable and effective
family planning methods and services." 42 U.S.C. § 300(a). Grants and
contracts under Title X must "be made in accordance with such regulations as
the Secretary may promulgate." 42 U.S.C. § 300a-4. Section 1008 of the Act,
however, provides that "[n]one of the funds appropriated under this subchapter
shall be used in programs where abortion is a method of family planning." 42
U.S.C. § 300a-6. That restriction was intended to ensure that Title X funds
would "be used only to support preventive family planning services, population
research, infertility services, and other related medical, informational, and
educational activities." H.R.Conf.Rep. No. 91-1667, p. 8 (1970), U.S.Code
Cong. & Admin.News 1970, pp. 5068, 5081-82.

4

In 1988, the Secretary promulgated new regulations designed to provide "
'clear and operational guidance' to grantees about how to preserve the
distinction between Title X programs and abortion as a method of family
planning." 53 Fed.Reg. 2923-2924 (1988). The regulations clarify, through the
definition of the term "family planning," that Congress intended Title X funds
"to be used only to support _preventive_ family planning services."
H.R.Conf.Rep. No. 91-1667, p. 8, U.S.Code Cong. & Admin.News 1970, p. 5081
(emphasis added). Accordingly, Title X services are limited to "preconceptual
counseling, education, and general reproductive health care," and expressly
exclude "pregnancy care (including obstetric or prenatal care)." 42 CFR § 59.2
(1989).2 The regulations "focus the emphasis of the Title X program on its
traditional mission: The provision of preventive family planning services
specifically designed to enable individuals to determine the number and
spacing of their children, while clarifying that pregnant women must be
referred to appropriate prenatal care services." 53 Fed.Reg. 2925 (1988).

5

The regulations attach three principal conditions on the grant of federal
funds for Title X projects. First, the regulations specify that a "Title X
project may not provide counseling concerning the use of abortion as a method
of family planning or provide referral for abortion as a method of family
planning." 42 CFR 59.8(a)(1) (1989). Because Title X is limited to
preconceptional services, the program does not furnish services related to
childbirth. Only in the context of a referral out of the Title X program is a
pregnant woman given transitional information. § 59.8(a)(2). Title X projects
must refer every pregnant client "for appropriate prenatal and/or social
services by furnishing a list of available providers that promote the welfare
of the mother and the unborn child." _Ibid._ The list may not be used
indirectly to encourage or promote abortion, "such as by weighing the list of
referrals in favor of health care providers which perform abortions, by
including on the list of referral providers health care providers whose
principal business is the provision of abortions, by excluding available
providers who do not provide abortions, or by 'steering' clients to providers
who offer abortion as a method of family planning." § 59.8(a)(3). The Title X
project is expressly prohibited from referring a pregnant woman to an abortion
provider, even upon specific request. One permissible response to such an
inquiry is that "the project does not consider abortion an appropriate method
of family planning and therefore does not counsel or refer for abortion." §
59.8(b)(5).

6

Second, the regulations broadly prohibit a Title X project from engaging in
activities that "encourage, promote or advocate abortion as a method of family
planning." § 59.10(a). Forbidden activities include lobbying for legislation
that would increase the availability of abortion as a method of family
planning, developing or disseminating materials advocating abortion as a
method of family planning, providing speakers to promote abortion as a method
of family planning, using legal action to make abortion available in any way
as a method of family planning, and paying dues to any group that advocates
abortion as a method of family planning as a substantial part of its
activities. _Ibid._

7

Third, the regulations require that Title X projects be organized so that they
are "physically and financially separate" from prohibited abortion activities.
§ 59.9. To be deemed physically and financially separate, "a Title X project
must have an objective integrity and independence from prohibited activities.
Mere bookkeeping separation of Title X funds from other monies is not
sufficient." _Ibid._ The regulations provide a list of nonexclusive factors
for the Secretary to consider in conducting a case-by-case determination of
objective integrity and independence, such as the existence of separate
accounting records and separate personnel, and the degree of physical
separation of the project from facilities for prohibited activities. _Ibid._

B

8

Petitioners are Title X grantees and doctors who supervise Title X funds suing
on behalf of themselves and their patients. Respondent is the Secretary of the
Department of Health and Human Services. After the regulations had been
promulgated, but before they had been applied, petitioners filed two separate
actions, later consolidated, challenging the facial validity of the
regulations and seeking declaratory and injunctive relief to prevent
implementation of the regulations. Petitioners challenged the regulations on
the grounds that they were not authorized by Title X and that they violate the
First and Fifth Amendment rights of Title X clients and the First Amendment
rights of Title X health providers. After initially granting the petitioners a
preliminary injunction, the District Court rejected petitioners' statutory and
constitutional challenges to the regulations and granted summary judgment in
favor of the Secretary. _New York v. Bowen,_ 690 F.Supp. 1261 (SDNY 1988).

9

A panel of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed. 889 F.2d 401
(1989). Applying this Court's decision in _Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural
Resources Defense Council, Inc.,_ 467 U.S. 837, 842-843, 104 S.Ct. 2778,
2781-2782, 81 L.Ed.2d 694 (1984), the Court of Appeals determined that the
regulations were a permissible construction of the statute that legitimately
effectuated Congressional intent. The court rejected as "highly strained,"
petitioners' contention that the plain language of § 1008 forbids Title X
projects only from performing abortions. The court reasoned that "it would be
wholly anomalous to read Section 1008 to mean that a program that merely
counsels but does not perform abortions does not include abortion as a 'method
of family planning.' " 889 F.2d, at 407. "[T]he natural construction of . . .
the term 'method of family planning' includes counseling concerning abortion."
_Ibid._ The court found this construction consistent with the legislative
history and observed that "[a]ppellants' contrary view of the legislative
history is based entirely on highly generalized statements about the expansive
scope of the family planning services" that "do not specifically mention
counseling concerning abortion as an intended service of Title X projects" and
that "surely cannot be read to trump a section of the statute that
specifically excludes it." _Id.,_ at 407-408.

10

Turning to petitioners' constitutional challenges to the regulations, the
Court of Appeals rejected petitioners' Fifth Amendment challenge. It held that
the regulations do not impermissibly burden a woman's right to an abortion
because the "government may validly choose to favor childbirth over abortion
and to implement that choice by funding medical services relating to
childbirth but not those relating to abortion." _Id.,_ at 410. Finding that
the prohibition on the performance of abortions upheld by the Court in
_Webster v. Reproductive Health Services,_ 492 U.S. 490, 109 S.Ct. 3040, 106
L.Ed.2d 410 (1989), was "substantially greater in impact than the regulations
challenged in the instant matter," 889 F.2d, at 411, the court concluded that
the regulations "create[d] no affirmative legal barriers to access to
abortion." _Ibid.,_ citing _Webster v. Reproductive Health Services._

11

The court likewise found that the "Secretary's implementation of Congress's
decision not to fund abortion counseling, referral or advocacy also does not,
under applicable Supreme Court precedent, constitute a facial violation of the
First Amendment rights of health care providers or of women." 889 F.2d, at
412. The court explained that under _Regan v. Taxation With Representation of
Wash.,_ 461 U.S. 540, 103 S.Ct. 1997, 76 L.Ed.2d 129 (1983), the government
has no obligation to subsidize even the exercise of fundamental rights,
including "speech rights." The court also held that the regulations do not
violate the First Amendment by "condition[ing] receipt of a benefit on the
relinquishment of constitutional rights" because Title X grantees and their
employees "remain free to say whatever they wish about abortion outside the
Title X project." 889 F.2d, at 412. Finally, the court rejected petitioners'
contention that the regulations "facially discriminate on the basis of the
viewpoint of the speech involved." _Id.,_ at 414.

II

12

We begin by pointing out the posture of the cases before us. Petitioners are
challenging the _facial_ validity of the regulations. Thus, we are concerned
only with the question whether, on their face, the regulations are both
authorized by the Act, and can be construed in such a manner that they can be
applied to a set of individuals without infringing upon constitutionally
protected rights. Petitioners face a heavy burden in seeking to have the
regulations invalidated as facially unconstitutional. "A facial challenge to a
legislative Act is, of course, the most difficult challenge to mount
successfully, since the challenger must establish that no set of circumstances
exists under which the Act would be valid. The fact that [the regulations]
might operate unconstitutionally under some conceivable set of circumstances
is insufficient to render [them] wholly invalid." _United States v. Salerno,_
481 U.S. 739, 745, 107 S.Ct. 2095, 2100, 95 L.Ed.2d 697 (1987).

13

We turn first to petitioners' contention that the regulations exceed the
Secretary's authority under Title X and are arbitrary and capricious. We begin
with an examination of the regulations concerning abortion counseling,
referral, and advocacy, which every Court of Appeals has found to be
authorized by the statute, and then turn to the "program integrity
requirement," with respect to which the courts below have adopted conflicting
positions. We then address petitioner's claim that the regulations must be
struck down because they raise a substantial constitutional question.

14

* We need not dwell on the plain language of the statute because we agree with every court to have addressed the issue that the language is ambiguous. The language of § 1008--that "[n]one of the funds appropriated under this subchapter shall be used in programs where abortion is a method of family planning"--does not speak directly to the issues of counseling, referral, advocacy, or program integrity. If a statute is "silent or ambiguous with respect to the specific issue, the question for the court is whether the agency's answer is based on a permissible construction of the statute." _Chevron,_ 467 U.S., at 842-843, 104 S.Ct., at 2782.

15

The Secretary's construction of Title X may not be disturbed as an abuse of
discretion if it reflects a plausible construction of the plain language of
the statute and does not otherwise conflict with Congress' expressed intent.
_Ibid.,_ In determining whether a construction is permissible, "[t]he court
need not conclude that the agency construction was the only one it could
permissibly have adopted . . . or even the reading the court would have
reached if the question initially had arisen in a judicial proceeding." _Id.,_
at 843, n. 11, 104 S.Ct., at 2782, n. 11. Rather, substantial deference is
accorded to the interpretation of the authorizing statute by the agency
authorized with administering it. _Id.,_ at 844, 104 S.Ct., at 2782.

16

The broad language of Title X plainly allows the Secretary's construction of
the statute. By its own terms, § 1008 prohibits the use of Title X funds "in
programs where abortion is a method of family planning." Title X does not
define the term "method of family planning," nor does it enumerate what types
of medical and counseling services are entitled to Title X funding. Based on
the broad directives provided by Congress in Title X in general and § 1008 in
particular, we are unable to say that the Secretary's construction of the
prohibition in § 1008 to require a ban on counseling, referral, and advocacy
within the Title X project, is impermissible.

17

The District Courts and Courts of Appeals that have examined the legislative
history have all found, at least with regard to the Act's counseling,
referral, and advocacy provisions, that the legislative history is ambiguous
with respect to Congress' intent in enacting Title X and the prohibition of §
1008\. _Massachusetts v. Sullivan,_ 899 F.2d 53, 62 (CA1 1990) ("Congress has
not addressed specifically the question of the scope of the abortion
prohibition. The language of the statute and the legislative history can
support either of the litigants' positions"); _Planned Parenthood Federation
of America v. Sullivan,_ 913 F.2d 1492, 1497 (CA10 1990) ("[T]he
contemporaneous legislative history does not address whether clinics receiving
Title X funds can engage in nondirective counseling including the abortion
option and referrals"); _New York v. Sullivan,_ 889 F.2d 401, 407 (CA2 1989)
(case below) ("Nothing in the legislative history of Title X detracts" from
the Secretary's construction of § 1008). We join these courts in holding that
the legislative history is ambiguous and fails to shed light on relevant
congressional intent. At no time did Congress directly address the issues of
abortion counseling, referral, or advocacy. The parties' attempts to
characterize highly generalized, conflicting statements in the legislative
history into accurate revelations of congressional intent are unavailing.3

18

When we find, as we do here, that the legislative history is ambiguous and
unenlightening on the matters with respect to which the regulations deal, we
customarily defer to the expertise of the agency. Petitioners argue, however,
that the regulations are entitled to little or no deference because they
"reverse a longstanding agency policy that permitted nondirective counseling
and referral for abortion," Brief for Petitioners in No. 89-1392, p. 20, and
thus represent a sharp beak from the Secretary's prior construction of the
statute. Petitioners argue that the agency's prior consistent interpretation
of Section 1008 to permit nondirective counseling and to encourage
coordination with local and state family planning services is entitled to
substantial weight.

19

This Court has rejected the argument that an agency's interpretation "is not
entitled to deference because it represents a sharp break with prior
interpretations" of the statute in question. _Chevron,_ 467 U.S., at 862, 104
S.Ct., at 2791. In _Chevron,_ we held that a revised interpretation deserves
deference because "[a]n initial agency interpretation is not instantly carved
in stone" and "the agency, to engage in informed rulemaking, must consider
varying interpretations and the wisdom of its policy on a continuing basis."
_Id.,_ at 863-864, 104 S.Ct., at 2792. An agency is not required to "
'establish rules of conduct to last forever,' " Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Assn. of
United States v. State _Farm Mutual Automobile Ins. Co.,_ 463 U.S. 29, 42, 103
S.Ct. 2856, 2866, 77 L.Ed.2d 443 (1983), quoting _American Trucking Assns.,
Inc. v. Atchinson, T. & S.F.R. Co.,_ 387 U.S. 397, 416, 87 S.Ct. 1608, 1618,
18 L.Ed.2d 847 (1967); _NLRB v. Curtin Matheson Scientific, Inc.,_ 494 U.S.
----, 110 S.Ct. 1542, 108 L.Ed.2d 801 (1990), but rather "must be given ample
latitude to 'adapt [its] rules and policies to the demands of changing
circumstances.' " _Motor Vehicle Mfrs., supra,_ 463 U.S., at 42, 103 S.Ct., at
2866, quoting _Permian Basin Area Rate Cases,_ 390 U.S. 747, 784, 88 S.Ct.
1344, 1369, 20 L.Ed.2d 312 (1968).

20

We find that the Secretary amply justified his change of interpretation with a
"reasoned analysis." _Motor Vehicle Mfrs., supra,_ 463 U.S., at 42, 103 S.Ct.,
at 2866. The Secretary explained that the regulations are a result of his
determination, in the wake of the critical reports of the General Accounting
Office (GAO) and the Office of the Inspector General (OIG), that prior policy
failed to implement properly the statute and that it was necessary to provide
"clear and operational guidance to grantees to preserve the distinction
between Title X programs and abortion as a method of family planning." 53
Fed.Reg. 2923-2924 (1988). He also determined that the new regulations are
more in keeping with the original intent of the statute, are justified by
client experience under the prior policy, and are supported by a shift in
attitude against the "elimination of unborn children by abortion." We believe
that these justifications are sufficient to support the Secretary's revised
approach. Having concluded that the plain language and legislative history are
ambiguous as to Congress' intent in enacting Title X, we must defer to the
Secretary's permissible construction of the statute.

B

21

We turn next to the "program integrity" requirements embodied at § 59.9 of the
regulations, mandating separate facilities, personnel, and records. These
requirements are not inconsistent with the plain language of Title X.
Petitioners contend, however, that they are based on an impermissible
construction of the statute because they frustrate the clearly expressed
intent of Congress that Title X programs be an integral part of a broader,
comprehensive, health-care system. They argue that this integration is
impermissibly burdened because the efficient use of non-Title X funds by Title
X grantees will be adversely affected by the regulations.

22

The Secretary defends the separation requirements of § 59.9 on the grounds
that they are necessary to assure that Title X grantees apply federal funds
only to federally authorized purposes and that grantees avoid creating the
appearance that the government is supporting abortion-related activities. The
program integrity regulations were promulgated in direct response to the
observations in the GAO and OIG reports that "[b]ecause the distinction
between the recipient's title X and other activities may not be easily
recognized, the public can get the impression that Federal funds are being
improperly used for abortion activities." App. 85. The Secretary concluded
that:

23

"[M]eeting the requirement of section 1008 mandates that Title X programs be
organized so that they are physically and financially separate from other
activities which are prohibited from inclusion in a Title X program. Having a
program that is separate from such activities is a necessary predicate to any
determination that abortion is not being included as a method of family
planning in the Title X program." 53 Fed.Reg. 2940 (1988).

24

The Secretary further argues that the separation requirements do not represent
a deviation from past policy because the agency has consistently taken the
position that § 1008 requires some degree of physical and financial separation
between Title X projects and abortion-related activities.

25

We agree that the program integrity requirements are based on a permissible
construction of the statute and are not inconsistent with Congressional
intent. As noted, the legislative history is clear about very little, and
program integrity is no exception. The statements relied upon by the
petitioners to infer such an intent are highly generalized, and do not
directly address the scope of § 1008.

26

For example, the cornerstone of the conclusion that in Title X Congress
intended a comprehensive, integrated system of family planning services is the
statement in the statute requiring state health authorities applying for Title
X funds to submit "a state plan for a coordinated and comprehensive program of
family planning services." § 1002\. This statement is, on its face, ambiguous
as to Congress' intent in enacting Title X and the prohibition of § 1008\.
Placed in context, the statement merely requires that a State health authority
submit a plan for a "coordinated and comprehensive program of family planning
services" in order to be eligible for Title X funds. By its own terms, the
language evinces Congress' intent to place a duty on state entities seeking
federal funds; it does not speak either to an overall view of family planning
services or to the Secretary's responsibility for implementing the statute.
Likewise, the statement in the original House Report on Title X that the Act
was "not intended to interfere with or limit programs conducted in accordance
with State or local laws" and supported through non-Title X funds is equally
unclear. H.R.Conf.Rep. No. 91-1667, pp. 8-9 (1970), U.S.Code Cong. &
Admin.News 1970, p. 5082. This language directly follows the statement that it
is the "intent of both Houses that the funds authorized under this legislation
be used only to support preventive family planning services. . . . The
conferees have adopted the language contained in section 1008, which prohibits
the use of such funds for abortion, in order to make this intent clear."
_Id.,_ at 8, U.S.Code Cong. & Admin.News 1970, pp. 5081-82. When placed in
context and read in light of the express prohibition of § 1008, the statements
fall short of evidencing a congressional intent that would render the
Secretary's interpretation of the statute impermissible.

27

While the petitioners' interpretation of the legislative history may be a
permissible one, it is by no means the only one, and it is certainly not the
one found by the Secretary. It is well established that legislative history
which does not demonstrate a clear and certain congressional intent cannot
form the basis for enjoining the regulations. See _Motor Vehicle Mfrs.,_ 463
U.S., at 42, 103 S.Ct., at 2866. The Secretary based the need for the
separation requirements "squarely on the congressional intent that abortion
not be a part of a Title X funded program." 52 Fed.Reg. 33212 (1987). Indeed,
if one thing is clear from the legislative history, it is that Congress
intended that Title X funds be kept separate and distinct from abortion-
related activities. It is undisputed that Title X was intended to provide
primarily prepregnancy preventive services. Certainly the Secretary's
interpretation of the statute that separate facilities are necessary,
especially in light of the express prohibition of § 1008, cannot be judged
unreasonable. Accordingly, we defer to the Secretary's reasoned determination
that the program integrity requirements are necessary to implement the
prohibition.

28

Petitioners also contend that the regulations must be invalidated because they
raise serious questions of constitutional law. They rely on _Edward J.
Debartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Building and Construction Trades
Council,_ 485 U.S. 568, 108 S.Ct. 1392, 99 L.Ed.2d 645 (1988), and _NLRB v.
Catholic Bishop of Chicago,_ 440 U.S. 490, 99 S.Ct. 1313, 59 L.Ed.2d 533
(1979), which hold that "an Act of Congress ought not to be construed to
violate the Constitution if any other possible construction remains available.
_Id.,_ at 5. Under this canon of statutory construction, "[t]he elementary
rule is that every reasonable construction must be resorted to in order to
_save_ a _statute_ from unconstitutionality." _Debartolo Corp., supra,_ 485
U.S., at 575, 108 S.Ct., at 1397 (emphasis added) _quoting Hooper v.
California,_ 155 U.S. 648, 657, 15 S.Ct. 207, 211, 39 L.Ed. 297 (1895).

29

The principle enunciated in _Hooper v. California, supra,_ and subsequent
cases, is a categorical one: "as between two possible interpretations of a
statute, by one of which it would be unconstitutional and by the other valid,
our plain duty is to adopt that which will save the Act." _Blodgett v.
Holden,_ 275 U.S. 142, 148, 48 S.Ct. 105, 107, 72 L.Ed. 206 (1927) (opinion of
Holmes, J.). This principle is based at least in part on the fact that a
decision to declare an act of Congress unconstitutional "is the gravest and
most delicate duty that this Court is called on to perform." _Id._ Following
_Hooper, supra,_ cases such as _United States v. Delaware and Hudson Co.,_ 213
U.S. 366, 408, 29 S.Ct. 527, 535, 53 L.Ed. 836, and _United States v. Jin Fuey
Moy,_ 241 U.S. 394, 401, 36 S.Ct. 658, 659, 60 L.Ed. 1061, developed the
corollary doctrine that "[a] statute must be construed, if fairly possible, so
as to avoid not only the conclusion that it is unconstitutional but also grave
doubts upon that score." _Jin Fuey Moy, supra,_ at 401, 36 S.Ct., at 659. This
canon is followed out of respect for Congress, which we assume legislates in
the light of constitutional limitations. _FTC v. American Tobacco Co.,_ 264
U.S. 298, 305-307, 44 S.Ct. 336, 337, 68 L.Ed. 696 (1924). It is qualified by
the proposition that "avoidance of a difficulty will not be pressed to the
point of disingenuous evasion." _Moore Ice Cream Co. v. Rose,_ 289 U.S. 373,
379, 53 S.Ct. 620, 622, 77 L.Ed. 1265 (1933).

30

Here Congress forbade the use of appropriated funds in programs where abortion
is a method of family planning. It authorized the Secretary to promulgate
regulations implementing this provision. The extensive litigation regarding
governmental restrictions on abortion since our decision in _Roe v. Wade,_ 410
U.S. 113, 93 S.Ct. 705, 35 L.Ed.2d 147 (1973), suggests that it was likely
that any set of regulations promulgated by the Secretary--other than the ones
in force prior to 1988 and found by him to be relatively toothless and
ineffectual--would be challenged on constitutional grounds. While we do not
think that the constitutional arguments made by petitioners in this case are
without some force, in Part III, infra, we hold that they do not carry the
day. Applying the canon of construction under discussion as best we can, we
hold that the regulations promulgated by the Secretary do not raise the sort
of "grave and doubtful constitutional questions," _Delaware and Hudson Co.,
supra,_ 213 U.S., at 408, 29 S.Ct., at 536, that would lead us to assume
Congress did not intend to authorize their issuance. Therefore, we need not
invalidate the regulations in order to save the statute from
unconstitutionality.

III

31

Petitioners contend that the regulations violate the First Amendment by
impermissibly discriminating based on viewpoint because they prohibit "all
discussion about abortion as a lawful option--including counseling, referral,
and the provision of neutral and accurate information about ending a pregnancy
--while compelling the clinic or counselor to provide information that
promotes continuing a pregnancy to term." Brief for Petitioners in No.
89-1391, p. 11. They assert that the regulations violate the "free speech
rights of private health care organizations that receive Title X funds, of
their staff, and of their patients" by impermissibly imposing "viewpoint-
discriminatory conditions on government subsidies" and thus penaliz[e] speech
funded with non-Title X monies." _Id.,_ at 13, 14, 24. Because "Title X
continues to fund speech ancillary to pregnancy testing in a manner that is
not evenhanded with respect to views and information about abortion, it
invidiously discriminates on the basis of viewpoint." _Id.,_ at 18. Relying on
_Regan v. Taxation With Representation of Wash.,_ and _Arkansas Writers
Project, Inc. v. Ragland,_ 481 U.S. 221, 234, 107 S.Ct. 1722, 1730, 95 L.Ed.2d
209 (1987), petitioners also assert that while the Government may place
certain conditions on the receipt of federal subsidies, it may not
"discriminate invidiously in its subsidies in such a way as to 'ai[m] at the
suppression of dangerous ideas.' " _Regan, supra,_ 461 U.S., at 548, 103
S.Ct., at 2002 (quoting _Cammarano v. United States,_ 358 U.S. 498, 513, 79
S.Ct. 524, 533, 3 L.Ed.2d 462 (1959)).

32

There is no question but that the statutory prohibition contained in § 1008 is
constitutional. In _Maher v. Roe, supra,_ we upheld a state welfare regulation
under which Medicaid recipients received payments for services related to
childbirth, but not for nontherapeutic abortions. The Court rejected the claim
that this unequal subsidization worked a violation of the Constitution. We
held that the government may "make a value judgment favoring childbirth over
abortion, and . . . implement that judgment by the allocation of public
funds." _Id.,_ 432 U.S., at 474, 97 S.Ct., at 2382. Here the Government is
exercising the authority it possesses under _Maher_ and _McRae_ to subsidize
family planning services which will lead to conception and childbirth, and
declining to "promote or encourage abortion." The Government can, without
violating the Constitution, selectively fund a program to encourage certain
activities it believes to be in the public interest, without at the same time
funding an alternate program which seeks to deal with the problem in another
way. In so doing, the Government has not discriminated on the basis of
viewpoint; it has merely chosen to fund one activity to the exclusion of the
other. "[A] legislature's decision not to subsidize the exercise of a
fundamental right does not infringe the right." _Regan, supra,_ 461 U.S., at
549, 103 S.Ct., at 2003. See also, _Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 96 S.Ct.
612, 46 L.Ed.2d 659 (1976); _Cammarano v. United States, supra._ "A refusal to
fund protected activity, without more, cannot be equated with the imposition
of a 'penalty' on that activity." _McRae,_ 448 U.S., at 317, n. 19, 100 S.Ct.,
at 2688, n. 19. "There is a basic difference between direct state interference
with a protected activity and state encouragement of an alternative activity
consonant with legislative policy." _Maher,_ 432 U.S., at 475, 97 S.Ct., at
2383.

33

The challenged regulations implement the statutory prohibition by prohibiting
counseling, referral, and the provision of information regarding abortion as a
method of family planning. They are designed to ensure that the limits of the
federal program are observed. The Title X program is designed not for prenatal
care, but to encourage family planning. A doctor who wished to offer prenatal
care to a project patient who became pregnant could properly be prohibited
from doing so because such service is outside the scope of the federally
funded program. The regulations prohibiting abortion counseling and referral
are of the same ilk; "no funds appropriated for the project may be used in
programs where abortion is a method of family planning," and a doctor employed
by the project may be prohibited in the course of his project duties from
counseling abortion or referring for abortion. This is not a case of the
Government "suppressing a dangerous idea," but of a prohibition on a project
grantee or its employees from engaging in activities outside of its scope.

34

To hold that the Government unconstitutionally discriminates on the basis of
viewpoint when it chooses to fund a program dedicated to advance certain
permissible goals, because the program in advancing those goals necessarily
discourages alternate goals, would render numerous government programs
constitutionally suspect. When Congress established a National Endowment for
Democracy to encourage other countries to adopt democratic principles, 22
U.S.C. § 4411(b), it was not constitutionally required to fund a program to
encourage competing lines of political philosophy such as Communism and
Fascism. Petitioners' assertions ultimately boil down to the position that if
the government chooses to subsidize one protected right, it must subsidize
analogous counterpart rights. But the Court has soundly rejected that
proposition. _Regan v. Taxation With Representation of Wash., supra;_ _Maher
v. Roe, supra;_ _Harris v. McRae, supra._ Within far broader limits than
petitioners are willing to concede, when the government appropriates public
funds to establish a program it is entitled to define the limits of that
program.

35

We believe that petitioners' reliance upon our decision in _Arkansas Writers
Project, supra,_ is misplaced. That case involved a state sales tax which
discriminated between magazines on the basis of their content. Relying on this
fact, and on the fact that the tax "targets a small group within the press,"
contrary to our decision in _Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. v. Minnesota
Comm'r of Revenue,_ 460 U.S. 575, 103 S.Ct. 1365, 75 L.Ed.2d 295 (1983), the
Court held the tax invalid. But we have here not the case of a general law
singling out a disfavored group on the basis of speech content, but a case of
the Government refusing to fund activities, including speech, which are
specifically excluded from the scope of the project funded.

36

Petitioners rely heavily on their claim that the regulations would not, in the
circumstance of a medical emergency, permit a Title X project to refer a woman
whose pregnancy places her life in imminent peril to a provider of abortions
or abortion-related services. This case, of course, involves only a facial
challenge to the regulations, and we do not have before us any application by
the Secretary to a specific fact situation. On their face, we do not read the
regulations to bar abortion referral or counseling in such circumstances.
Abortion counseling as a "method of family planning" is prohibited, and it
does not seem that a medically necessitated abortion in such circumstances
would be the equivalent of its use as a "method of family planning." Neither §
1008 nor the specific restrictions of the regulations would apply. Moreover,
the regulations themselves contemplate that a Title X project would be
permitted to engage in otherwise prohibited abortion-related activity in such
circumstances. Section 59.8(a)(2) provides a specific exemption for emergency
care and requires Title X recipients "to refer the client immediately to an
appropriate provider of emergency medical services." 42 CFR 59.8(a)(2) (1989).
Section 59.5(b)(1) also requires Title X projects to provide "necessary
referral to other medical facilities when medically indicated."4

37

Petitioners also contend that the restrictions on the subsidization of
abortion-related speech contained in the regulations are impermissible because
they condition the receipt of a benefit, in this case Title X funding, on the
relinquishment of a constitutional right, the right to engage in abortion
advocacy and counseling. Relying on _Perry v. Sindermann,_ 408 U.S. 593, 597,
92 S.Ct. 2694, 2697, 33 L.Ed.2d 570 (1972), and _FCC v. League of Women Voters
of Cal.,_ 468 U.S. 364, 104 S.Ct. 3106, 82 L.Ed.2d 278 (1984), petitioners
argue that "even though the government may deny [a] . . . benefit for any
number of reasons, there are some reasons upon which the government may not
rely. It may not deny a benefit to a person on a basis that infringes his
constitutionally protected interests--especially, his interest in freedom of
speech." _Perry, supra,_ 408 U.S., at 597, 92 S.Ct., at 2697.

38

Petitioners' reliance on these cases is unavailing, however, because here the
government is not denying a benefit to anyone, but is instead simply insisting
that public funds be spent for the purposes for which they were authorized.
The Secretary's regulations do not force the Title X grantee to give up
abortion-related speech; they merely require that the grantee keep such
activities separate and distinct from Title X activities. Title X expressly
distinguishes between a Title X _grantee_ and a Title X _project._ The
grantee, which normally is a health care organization, may receive funds from
a variety of sources for a variety of purposes. Brief for Petitioners in No.
89-1391, pp. 3, n. 5, 13. The grantee receives Title X funds, however, for the
specific and limited purpose of establishing and operating a Title X project.
42 U.S.C. § 300(a). The regulations govern the scope of the Title X
_project's_ activities, and leave the grantee unfettered in its other
activities. The Title X _grantee_ can continue to perform abortions, provide
abortion-related services, and engage in abortion advocacy; it simply is
required to conduct those activities through programs that are separate and
independent from the project that receives Title X funds. 42 CFR 59.9 (1989).

39

In contrast, our "unconstitutional conditions" cases involve situations in
which the government has placed a condition on the _recipient_ of the subsidy
rather that on a particular program or service, thus effectively prohibiting
the recipient from engaging in the protected conduct outside the scope of the
federally funded program. In _FCC v. League of Women Voters of Cal.,_ we
invalidated a federal law providing that noncommercial television and radio
stations that receive federal grants may not "engage in editorializing." Under
that law, a recipient of federal funds was "barred absolutely from all
editorializing" because it "is not able to segregate its activities according
to the source of its funding" and thus "has no way of limiting the use of its
federal funds to all noneditorializing activities." The effect of the law was
that "a noncommercial educational station that receives only 1% of its overall
income from [federal] grants is barred absolutely from all editorializing" and
"barred from using even wholly private funds to finance its editorial
activity." 468 U.S., at 400, 104 S.Ct., at 3128. We expressly recognized,
however, that were Congress to permit the recipient stations to "establish
'affiliate' organizations which could then use the station's facilities to
editorialize with nonfederal funds, such a statutory mechanism would plainly
be valid." _Ibid._ Such a scheme would permit the station "to make known its
views on matters of public importance through its nonfederally funded,
editorializing affiliate without losing federal grants for its
noneditorializing broadcast activities." _Ibid._

40

Similarly, in _Regan_ we held that Congress could, in the exercise of its
spending power, reasonably refuse to subsidize the lobbying activities of tax-
exempt charitable organizations by prohibiting such organizations from using
tax-deductible contributions to support their lobbying efforts. In so holding,
we explained that such organizations remained free "to receive deductible
contributions to support . . . nonlobbying activit[ies]." 461 U.S., at 545,
103 S.Ct., at 2001. Thus, a charitable organization could create, under §
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), an
affiliate to conduct its nonlobbying activities using tax-deductible
contributions, and at the same time establish, under § 501(c)(4), a separate
affiliate to pursue its lobbying efforts without such contributions. _Regan,
supra,_ at 544, 103 S.Ct., at 2000. Given that alternative, the Court
concluded that "Congress has not infringed any First Amendment rights or
regulated any First Amendment activity[; it] has simply chosen not to pay for
[appellee's] lobbying." _Id.,_ at 546, 103 S.Ct., at 2001. We also noted that
appellee "would, of course, have to ensure that the § 501(c)(3) organization
did not subsidize the § 501(c)(4) organization; otherwise, public funds might
be spent on an activity Congress chose not to subsidize." _Ibid._ The
condition that federal funds will be used only to further the purposes of a
grant does not violate constitutional rights. "Congress could, for example,
grant funds to an organization dedicated to combating teenage drug abuse, but
condition the grant by providing that none of the money received from Congress
should be used to lobby state legislatures." See _id.,_ at 548, 103 S.Ct., at
2002.

41

By requiring that the Title X grantee engage in abortion-related activity
separately from activity receiving federal funding, Congress has, consistent
with our teachings in _League of Women Voters_ and _Regan,_ not denied it the
right to engage in abortion-related activities. Congress has merely refused to
fund such activities out of the public fisc, and the Secretary has simply
required a certain degree of separation from the Title X project in order to
ensure the integrity of the federally funded program.

42

The same principles apply to petitioners' claim that the regulations abridge
the free speech rights of the grantee's staff. Individuals who are voluntarily
employed for a Title X project must perform their duties in accordance with
the regulation's restrictions on abortion counseling and referral. The
employees remain free, however, to pursue abortion-related activities when
they are not acting under the auspices of the Title X project. The
regulations, which govern solely the scope of the Title X project's
activities, do not in any way restrict the activities of those persons acting
as private individuals. The employees' freedom of expression is limited during
the time that they actually work for the project; but this limitation is a
consequence of their decision to accept employment in a project, the scope of
which is permissibly restricted by the funding authority.5

43

This is not to suggest that funding by the Government, even when coupled with
the freedom of the fund recipients to speak outside the scope of the
Government-funded project, is invariably sufficient to justify government
control over the content of expression. For example, this Court has recognized
that the existence of a Government "subsidy," in the form of Government-owned
property, does not justify the restriction of speech in areas that have "been
traditionally open to the public for expressive activity," _United States v.
Kokinda,_ \--- U.S. ----, 110 S.Ct. 3115, 3119, 111 L.Ed.2d 571 (1990); _Hague
v. CIO,_ 307 U.S. 496, 515, 59 S.Ct. 954, 963, 83 L.Ed. 1423 (1939) (opinion
of Roberts, J.), or have been "expressly dedicated to speech activity."
_Kokinda, supra,_ 110 S.Ct., at 3119; _Perry Education Assn. v. Perry Local
Educators' Assn.,_ 460 U.S. 37, 45, 103 S.Ct. 948, 954, 74 L.Ed.2d 794 (1983).
Similarly, we have recognized that the university is a traditional sphere of
free expression so fundamental to the functioning of our society that the
Government's ability to control speech within that sphere by means of
conditions attached to the expenditure of Government funds is restricted by
the vagueness and overbreadth doctrines of the First Amendment, _Keyishian v.
Board of Regents,_ 385 U.S. 589, 603, 605-606, 87 S.Ct. 675, 683, 684-685, 17
L.Ed.2d 629 (1967). It could be argued by analogy that traditional
relationships such as that between doctor and patient should enjoy protection
under the First Amendment from government regulation, even when subsidized by
the Government. We need not resolve that question here, however, because the
Title X program regulations do not significantly impinge upon the doctor-
patient relationship. Nothing in them requires a doctor to represent as his
own any opinion that he does not in fact hold. Nor is the doctor-patient
relationship established by the Title X program sufficiently all-encompassing
so as to justify an expectation on the part of the patient of comprehensive
medical advice. The program does not provide post-conception medical care, and
therefore a doctor's silence with regard to abortion cannot reasonably be
thought to mislead a client into thinking that the doctor does not consider
abortion an appropriate option for her. The doctor is always free to make
clear that advice regarding abortion is simply beyond the scope of the
program. In these circumstances, the general rule that the Government may
choose not to subsidize speech applies with full force.

IV

44

We turn now to petitioners' argument that the regulations violate a woman's
Fifth Amendment right to choose whether to terminate her pregnancy. We
recently reaffirmed the long-recognized principle that " 'the Due Process
Clauses generally confer no affirmative right to governmental aid, even where
such aid may be necessary to secure life, liberty, or property interests of
which the government itself may not deprive the individual.' " _Webster,_ 492
U.S., at ----, 109 S.Ct., at 3042, quoting _DeShaney v. Winnebago County Dept.
of Social Services,_ 489 U.S. 189, 196, 109 S.Ct. 998, 1003, 103 L.Ed.2d 249
(1989). The Government has no constitutional duty to subsidize an activity
merely because the activity is constitutionally protected and may validly
choose to fund childbirth over abortion and " 'implement that judgment by the
allocation of public funds' " for medical services relating to childbirth but
not to those relating to abortion. _Webster, supra,_ 492 U.S., at ----, 109
S.Ct., at ----, (citation omitted). The Government has no affirmative duty to
"commit any resources to facilitating abortions," _Webster,_ 492 U.S., at
----, 109 S.Ct., at 3052, and its decision to fund childbirth but not abortion
"places no governmental obstacle in the path of a woman who chooses to
terminate her pregnancy, but rather, by means of unequal subsidization of
abortion and other medical services, encourages alternative activity deemed in
the public interest." _McRae,_ 448 U.S., at 315, 100 S.Ct., at 2687.

45

That the regulations do not impermissibly burden a woman's Fifth Amendment
rights is evident from the line of cases beginning with _Maher_ and _McRae_
and culminating in our most recent decision in _Webster._ Just as Congress'
refusal to fund abortions in _McRae_ left "an indigent woman with at least the
same range of choice in deciding whether to obtain a medically necessary
abortion as she would have had if Congress had chosen to subsidize no health
care costs at all," 448 U.S., at 317, 100 S.Ct., at 2688, and "Missouri's
refusal to allow public employees to perform abortions in public hospitals
leaves a pregnant woman with the same choices as if the State had chosen not
to operate any public hospitals," _Webster, supra,_ 492 U.S., at ----, 109
S.Ct., at 3052, Congress' refusal to fund abortion counseling and advocacy
leaves a pregnant woman with the same choices as if the government had chosen
not to fund family-planning services at all. The difficulty that a woman
encounters when a Title X project does not provide abortion counseling or
referral leaves her in no different position than she would have been if the
government had not enacted Title X.

46

In _Webster_ we stated that "[h]aving held that the State's refusal [in
_Maher_ ] to fund abortions does not violate _Roe v. Wade,_ it strains logic
to reach a contrary result for the use of public facilities and employees."
492 U.S., at ----, 109 S.Ct., at 3052. It similarly would strain logic, in
light of the more extreme restrictions in those cases, to find that the mere
decision to exclude abortion-related services from a federally funded _pre-
conceptual_ family planning program, is unconstitutional.

47

Petitioners also argue that by impermissibly infringing on the doctor/patient
relationship and depriving a Title X client of information concerning abortion
as a method of family planning, the regulations violate a woman's Fifth
Amendment right to medical self-determination and to make informed medical
decisions free of government-imposed harm. They argue that under our decisions
in _Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health, Inc.,_ 462 U.S. 416, 103
S.Ct. 2481, 76 L.Ed.2d 687 (1983), and _Thornburg v. American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists,_ 476 U.S. 747, 106 S.Ct. 2169, 90 L.Ed.2d 779
(1986), the government cannot interfere with a woman's right to make an
informed and voluntary choice by placing restrictions on the patient/doctor
dialogue.

48

In _Akron,_ we invalidated a city ordinance requiring _all_ physicians to make
specified statements to the patient prior to performing an abortion in order
to ensure that the woman's consent was "truly informed." 462 U.S., at 423, 103
S.Ct., at 2488. Similarly, in _Thornburg,_ we struck down a state statute
mandating that a list of agencies offering alternatives to abortion and a
description of fetal development be provided to _every_ woman considering
terminating her pregnancy through an abortion. Critical to our decisions in
_Akron_ and _Thornburg_ to invalidate a governmental intrusion into the
patient/doctor dialogue was the fact that the laws in both cases required
_all_ doctors within their respective jurisdictions to provide _all_ pregnant
patients contemplating an abortion a litany of information, regardless of
whether the patient sought the information or whether the doctor thought the
information necessary to the patient's decision. Under the Secretary's
regulations, however, a doctor's ability to provide, and a woman's right to
receive, information concerning abortion and abortion-related services outside
the context of the Title X project remains unfettered. It would undoubtedly be
easier for a woman seeking an abortion if she could receive information about
abortion from a Title X project, but the Constitution does not require that
the Government distort the scope of its mandated program in order to provide
that information.

49

Petitioners contend, however, that most Title X clients are effectively
precluded by indigency and poverty from seeing a health care provider who will
provide abortion-related services. But once again, even these Title X clients
are in no worse position than if Congress had never enacted Title X. "The
financial constraints that restrict an indigent woman's ability to enjoy the
full range of constitutionally protected freedom of choice are the product not
of governmental restrictions on access to abortion, but rather of her
indigency." _McRae, supra,_ 448 U.S., at 316, 100 S.Ct., at 2688.

50

The Secretary's regulations are a permissible construction of Title X and do
not violate either the First or Fifth Amendments to the Constitution.
Accordingly, the judgment of the Court of Appeals is

51

_Affirmed._

52

Justice BLACKMUN, with whom Justice MARSHALL joins, with whom Justice STEVENS
joins as to Parts II and III, and with whom Justice O'CONNOR joins as to Part
I, dissenting.

53

Casting aside established principles of statutory construction and
administrative jurisprudence, the majority in these cases today unnecessarily
passes upon important questions of constitutional law. In so doing, the Court,
for the first time, upholds viewpoint-based suppression of speech solely
because it is imposed on those dependent upon the Government for economic
support. Under essentially the same rationale, the majority upholds direct
regulation of dialogue between a pregnant woman and her physician when that
regulation has both the purpose and the effect of manipulating her decision as
to the continuance of her pregnancy. I conclude that the Secretary's
regulation of referral, advocacy, and counseling activities exceeds his
statutory authority, and, also, that the Regulations violate the First and
Fifth Amendments of our Constitution. Accordingly, I dissent and would reverse
the divided-vote judgment of the Court of Appeals.

54

* The majority does not dispute that "[f]ederal statutes are to be so construed as to avoid serious doubt of their constitutionality." _Machinists v. Street,_ 367 U.S. 740, 749, 81 S.Ct. 1784, 1790, 6 L.Ed.2d 1141 (1961). See also _Hooper v. California,_ 155 U.S. 648, 657, 15 S.Ct. 207, 211, 39 L.Ed. 297 (1895); _Crowell v. Benson,_ 285 U.S. 22, 62, 52 S.Ct. 285, 296, 76 L.Ed. 598 (1932); _United States v. Security Industrial Bank,_ 459 U.S. 70, 78, 103 S.Ct. 407, 412, 74 L.Ed.2d 235 (1982). Nor does the majority deny that this principle is fully applicable to cases such as the instant one, in which a plausible but constitutionally suspect statutory interpretation is embodied in an administrative regulation. See _Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Building & Construction Trades Council,_ 485 U.S. 568, 575, 108 S.Ct. 1392, 1397, 99 L.Ed.2d 645 (1988); _NLRB v. Catholic Bishop of Chicago,_ 440 U.S. 490, 99 S.Ct. 1313, 59 L.Ed.2d 533 (1979); _Kent v. Dulles,_ 357 U.S. 116, 129-130, 78 S.Ct. 1113, 1119, 2 L.Ed.2d 1204 (1958). Rather, in its zeal to address the constitutional issues, the majority sidesteps this established canon of construction with the feeble excuse that the challenged Regulations "do not raise the sort of 'grave and doubtful constitutional questions,' . . . that would lead us to assume Congress did not intend to authorize their issuance." _Ante,_ at 191, quoting _United States v. Delaware and Hudson Co.,_ 213 U.S. 366, 408, 29 S.Ct. 527, 536, 53 L.Ed. 836 (1909).

55

This facile response to the intractable problem the Court addresses today is
disingenuous at best. Whether or not one believes that these Regulations are
valid, it avoids reality to contend that they do not give rise to serious
constitutional questions. The canon is applicable to this case not because "it
was likely that [the Regulations] . . . would be challenged on constitutional
grounds," _ante,_ at 191, but because the question squarely presented by the
Regulations--the extent to which the Government may attach an otherwise
unconstitutional condition to the receipt of a public benefit--implicates a
troubled area of our jurisprudence in which a court ought not entangle itself
unnecessarily. See, _e.g.,_ Epstein, Unconstitutional Conditions, State Power,
and the Limits of Consent, 102 Harv.L.Rev. 4, 6 (1988) (describing this
problem as "the basic structural issue that for over a hundred years has
bedeviled courts and commentators alike. . . ."); Sullivan, Unconstitutional
Conditions, 102 Harv.L.Rev. 1413, 1415-1416 (1989) (observing that this
Court's unconstitutional conditions cases "seem a minefield to be traversed
gingerly").

56

As is discussed in Parts II and III, _infra,_ the Regulations impose
viewpoint-based restrictions upon protected speech and are aimed at a woman's
decision whether to continue or terminate her pregnancy. In both respects,
they implicate core constitutional values. This verity is evidenced by the
fact that two of the three Courts of Appeals that have entertained challenges
to the Regulations have invalidated them on constitutional grounds. See
_Massachusetts v. Secretary of Health and Human Services,_ 899 F.2d 53 (CA1
1990); _Planned Parenthood Federation of America v. Sullivan,_ 913 F.2d 1492
(CA10 1990).

57

A divided panel of the Tenth Circuit found the Regulations to "fal[l] squarely
within the prohibition in _Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists,_ 476 U.S. 747, 106 S.Ct. 2169, 90 L.Ed.2d 779 (1986), and _City
of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health, Inc.,_ 462 U.S. 416, 103
S.Ct. 2481, 76 L.Ed.2d 687 (1983), against intrusion into the advice a woman
requests from or is given by her doctor." 913 F.2d, at 1501. The First
Circuit, en banc with one judge dissenting, found the Regulations to violate
both the privacy rights of Title X patients and the First Amendment rights of
Title X grantees. See also _New York v. Sullivan,_ 889 F.2d 401, 415 (CA2
1989) (Kearse, J., dissenting in part). That a bare majority of this Court
today reaches a different result does not change the fact that the
constitutional questions raised by the Regulations are both grave and
doubtful.

58

Nor is this a case in which the statutory language itself requires us to
address a constitutional question. Section 1008 of the Public Health Service
Act, 84 Stat. 1508, 42 U.S.C. § 300a-6, provides simply: "None of the funds
appropriated under this title shall be used in programs where abortion is a
method of family planning." The majority concedes that this language "does not
speak directly to the issues of counseling, referral, advocacy, or program
integrity," _ante,_ at 184, and that "the legislative history is ambiguous" in
this respect. _Ante,_ at 186. Consequently, the language of § 1008 easily
sustains a constitutionally trouble-free interpretation.1

59

Thus, this is not a situation in which "the intention of Congress is revealed
too distinctly to permit us to ignore it because of mere misgivings as to
power." _Moore Ice Cream Co. v. Rose,_ 289 U.S. 373, 379, 53 S.Ct. 620, 622,
77 L.Ed. 1265 (1933). Indeed, it would appear that our duty to avoid passing
unnecessarily upon important constitutional questions is strongest where, as
here, the language of the statute is decidedly ambiguous. It is both logical
and eminently prudent to assume that when Congress intends to press the limits
of constitutionality in its enactments, it will express that intent in
explicit and unambiguous terms. See Sunstein, Law and Administration After
_Chevron,_ 90 Colum.L.Rev. 2071, 2113 (1990) ("It is thus implausible that,
after _Chevron,_ agency interpretations of ambiguous statutes will prevail
even if the consequence of those interpretations is to produce invalidity or
to raise serious constitutional doubts").

60

Because I conclude that a plainly constitutional construction of § 1008 "is
not only 'fairly possible' but entirely reasonable," _Machinists,_ 367 U.S.,
at 750, 81 S.Ct., at 1790, I would reverse the judgment of the Court of
Appeals on this ground without deciding the constitutionality of the
Secretary's Regulations.

II

61

I also strongly disagree with the majority's disposition of petitioners'
constitutional claims, and because I feel that a response thereto is
indicated, I move on to that issue.

A.

62

Until today, the Court never has upheld viewpoint-based suppression of speech
simply because that suppression was a condition upon the acceptance of public
funds. Whatever may be the Government's power to condition the receipt of its
largess upon the relinquishment of constitutional rights, it surely does not
extend to a condition that suppresses the recipient's cherished freedom of
speech based solely upon the content or viewpoint of that speech. _Speiser v.
Randall,_ 357 U.S. 513, 518-519, 78 S.Ct. 1332, 1338, 2 L.Ed.2d 1460 (1958)
("To deny an exemption to claimants who engage in certain forms of speech is
in effect to penalize them for such speech. . . . The denial is 'frankly aimed
at the suppression of dangerous ideas,' " quoting _American Communications
Assn. v. Douds,_ 339 U.S. 382, 402, 70 S.Ct. 674, 685, 94 L.Ed. 925 (1950)).
See _Cammarano v. United States,_ 358 U.S. 498, 513, 79 S.Ct. 524, 533, 3
L.Ed.2d 462 (1959). See also _League of Women Voters,_ 468 U.S., at 407, 104
S.Ct., at 3131 (REHNQUIST, J., dissenting). Cf. _Arkansas Writers' Project,
Inc. v. Ragland,_ 481 U.S. 221, 237, 107 S.Ct. 1722, 1731, 95 L.Ed.2d 209
(1987) (SCALIA, J., dissenting). This rule is a sound one, for, as the Court
often has noted: " 'A regulation of speech that is motivated by nothing more
than a desire to curtail expression of a particular point of view on
controversial issues of general interest is the purest example of a "law . . .
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press." ' " _League of Women
Voters,_ 468 U.S., at 383-384, 104 S.Ct., at 3119, quoting _Consolidated
Edison Co. v. Public Service Comm'n of New York,_ 447 U.S. 530, 546, 100 S.Ct.
2326, 2338, 65 L.Ed.2d 319 (1980) (STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment).
"[A]bove all else, the First Amendment means that government has no power to
restrict expression because of its message, its ideas, its subject matter, or
its content." _Police Department of Chicago v. Mosley,_ 408 U.S. 92, 95, 92
S.Ct. 2286, 2290, 33 L.Ed.2d 212 (1972).

63

Nothing in the Court's opinion in _Regan v. Taxation With Representation of
Washington,_ 461 U.S. 540, 103 S.Ct. 1997, 76 L.Ed.2d 129 (1983), can be said
to challenge this long-settled understanding. In _Regan,_ the Court upheld a
content-neutral provision of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3),
that disallowed a particular tax-exempt status to organizations that
"attempt[ed] to influence legislation," while affording such status to
veterans' organizations irrespective of their lobbying activities. Finding the
case controlled by _Cammarano, supra,_ the Court explained: "The case would be
different if Congress were to discriminate invidiously in its subsidies in
such a way as to " 'ai[m] at the suppression of dangerous ideas.' " . . . We
find no indication that the statute was intended to suppress any ideas or any
demonstration that it has had that effect." 461 U.S., at 548, 103 S.Ct., at
2002, quoting _Cammarano,_ 358 U.S., at 513, 79 S.Ct., at 533, in turn quoting
_Speiser,_ 357 U.S., at 519, 78 S.Ct., at 1338. The separate concurrence in
_Regan_ joined the Court's opinion precisely "[b]ecause 26 U.S.C. § 501's
discrimination between veterans' organizations and charitable organizations is
not based on the content of their speech." _Id.,_ 461 U.S., at 551, 103 S.Ct.,
at 2004.

64

It cannot seriously be disputed that the counseling and referral provisions at
issue in the present cases constitute content-based regulation of speech.
Title X grantees may provide counseling and referral regarding any of a wide
range of family planning and other topics, save abortion. Cf. _Consolidated
Edison Co.,_ 447 U.S., at 537, 100 S.Ct., at 2333 ("The First Amendment's
hostility to content-based regulation extends not only to restrictions on
particular viewpoints, but also to prohibition of public discussion of an
entire topic"); _Boos v. Barry,_ 485 U.S. 312, 319, 108 S.Ct. 1157, 1163, 99
L.Ed.2d 333 (1988) (opinion of O'CONNOR, J.) (same).

65

The Regulations are also clearly viewpoint-based. While suppressing speech
favorable to abortion with one hand, the Secretary compels anti-abortion
speech with the other. For example, the Department of Health and Human
Services' own description of the Regulations makes plain that "Title X
projects are _required_ to facilitate access to prenatal care and social
services, including adoption services, that might be needed by the pregnant
client to promote her well-being and that of her child, while making it
abundantly clear that the project is not permitted to promote abortion by
facilitating access to abortion through the referral process." 53 Fed.Reg.
2927 (1988) (emphasis added).

66

Moreover, the Regulations command that a project refer for prenatal care each
woman diagnosed as pregnant, irrespective of the woman's expressed desire to
continue or terminate her pregnancy. 42 CFR § 59.8(a)(2) (1990). If a client
asks directly about abortion, a Title X physician or counselor is required to
say, in essence, that the project does not consider abortion to be an
appropriate method of family planning. § 59.8(b)(4). Both requirements are
antithetical to the First Amendment. See _Wooley v. Maynard,_ 430 U.S. 705,
714, 97 S.Ct. 1428, 1435, 51 L.Ed.2d 752 (1977).

67

The Regulations pertaining to "advocacy" are even more explicitly viewpoint-
based. These provide: "A Title X project may not _encourage, promote or
advocate_ abortion as a method of family planning." § 59.10 (emphasis added).
They explain: "This requirement prohibits actions to _assist_ women to obtain
abortions or _increase_ the availability or accessibility of abortion for
family planning purposes." § 59.10(a) (emphasis added). The Regulations do
not, however, proscribe or even regulate anti-abortion advocacy. These are
clearly restrictions aimed at the suppression of "dangerous ideas."

68

Remarkably, the majority concludes that "the Government has not discriminated
on the basis of viewpoint; it has merely chosen to fund one activity to the
exclusion of another." _Ante,_ at 193. But the majority's claim that the
Regulations merely limit a Title X project's speech to preventive or
preconceptional services, _ibid.,_ rings hollow in light of the broad range of
non-preventive services that the Regulations authorize Title X projects to
provide.2 By refusing to fund those family-planning projects that advocate
abortion _because_ they advocate abortion, the Government plainly has targeted
a particular viewpoint. Cf. _Ward v. Rock Against Racism,_ 491 U.S. 781, 109
S.Ct. 2746, 105 L.Ed.2d 661 (1989). The majority's reliance on the fact that
the Regulations pertain solely to funding decisions simply begs the question.
Clearly, there are some bases upon which government may not rest its decision
to fund or not to fund. For example, the Members of the majority surely would
agree that government may not base its decision to support an activity upon
considerations of race. See, _e.g., Yick Wo v. Hopkins,_ 118 U.S. 356, 6 S.Ct.
1064, 30 L.Ed. 220 (1886). As demonstrated above, our cases make clear that
ideological viewpoint is a similarly repugnant ground upon which to base
funding decisions.

69

The majority's reliance upon _Regan_ in this connection is also misplaced.
That case stands for the proposition that government has no obligation to
subsidize a private party's efforts to petition the legislature regarding its
views. Thus, if the challenged Regulations were confined to non-ideological
limitations upon the use of Title X funds for lobbying activities, there would
exist no violation of the First Amendment. The advocacy Regulations at issue
here, however, are not limited to lobbying but extend to all speech having the
effect of encouraging, promoting, or advocating abortion as a method of family
planning. § 59.10(a). Thus, in addition to their impermissible focus upon the
viewpoint of regulated speech, the provisions intrude upon a wide range of
communicative conduct, including the very words spoken to a woman by her
physician. By manipulating the content of the doctor/patient dialogue, the
Regulations upheld today force each of the petitioners "to be an instrument
for fostering public adherence to an ideological point of view [he or she]
finds unacceptable." _Wooley v. Maynard,_ 430 U.S., at 715, 97 S.Ct., at 1435.
This type of intrusive, ideologically based regulation of speech goes far
beyond the narrow lobbying limitations approved in _Regan,_ and cannot be
justified simply because it is a condition upon the receipt of a governmental
benefit.3

B

70

The Court concludes that the challenged Regulations do not violate the First
Amendment rights of Title X staff members because any limitation of the
employees' freedom of expression is simply a consequence of their decision to
accept employment at a federally funded project. _Ante,_ at 198-199. But it
has never been sufficient to justify an otherwise unconstitutional condition
upon public employment that the employee may escape the condition by
relinquishing his or her job. It is beyond question "that a government may not
require an individual to relinquish rights guaranteed him by the First
Amendment as a condition of public employment." _Abood v. Detroit Board of
Education,_ 431 U.S. 209, 234, 97 S.Ct. 1782, 1799, 52 L.Ed.2d 261 (1977),
citing _Elrod v. Burns,_ 427 U.S. 347, 357-360, 96 S.Ct. 2673, 2681-2683, 49
L.Ed.2d 547 (1976), and cases cited therein; _Perry v. Sindermann,_ 408 U.S.
593, 92 S.Ct. 2694, 33 L.Ed.2d 570 (1972); _Keyishian v. Board of Regents,_
385 U.S. 589, 87 S.Ct. 675, 17 L.Ed.2d 629 (1967). Nearly two decades ago, it
was said:

71

"For at least a quarter-century, this Court has made clear that even though a
person has no 'right' to a valuable governmental benefit and even though the
government may deny him the benefit for any number of reasons, there are some
reasons upon which the government may not rely. It may not deny a benefit to a
person on a basis that infringes his constitutionally protected interests--
especially, his interest in freedom of speech. For if the government could
deny a benefit to a person because of his constitutionally protected speech or
associations, his exercise of those freedoms would in effect be penalized and
inhibited. This would allow the government to 'produce a result which [it]
could not command directly.' " _Perry v. Sindermann,_ 408 U.S., at 597, 92
S.Ct., at 2697, quoting _Speiser v. Randall,_ 357 U.S. 513, 526, 78 S.Ct.
1332, 1342, 2 L.Ed.2d 1460 (1958).

72

The majority attempts to circumvent this principle by emphasizing that Title X
physicians and counselors "remain free . . . to pursue abortion-related
activities when they are not acting under the auspices of the Title X
project." _Ante,_ at 198. "The regulations," the majority explains, "do not in
any way restrict the activities of those persons acting as private
individuals." _Ibid._ Under the majority's reasoning, the First Amendment
could be read to tolerate _any_ governmental restriction upon an employee's
speech so long as that restriction is limited to the funded workplace. This is
a dangerous proposition, and one the Court has rightly rejected in the past.

73

In _Abood,_ it was no answer to the petitioners' claim of compelled speech as
a condition upon public employment that their speech outside the workplace
remained unregulated by the State. Nor was the public employee's First
Amendment claim in _Rankin v. McPherson,_ 483 U.S. 378, 107 S.Ct. 2891, 97
L.Ed.2d 315 (1987), derogated because the communication that her employer
sought to punish occurred during business hours. At the least, such conditions
require courts to balance the speaker's interest in the message against those
of government in preventing its dissemination. _Id.,_ at 384, 107 S.Ct., at
2896; _Pickering v. Board of Education,_ 391 U.S. 563, 568, 88 S.Ct. 1731,
1734, 20 L.Ed.2d 811 (1968).

74

In the cases at bar, the speaker's interest in the communication is both clear
and vital. In addressing the family-planning needs of their clients, the
physicians and counselors who staff Title X projects seek to provide them with
the full range of information and options regarding their health and
reproductive freedom. Indeed, the legitimate expectations of the patient and
the ethical responsibilities of the medical profession demand no less. "The
patient's right of self-decision can be effectively exercised only if the
patient possesses enough information to enable an intelligent choice. . . .
The physician has an ethical obligation to help the patient make choices from
among the therapeutic alternatives consistent with good medical practice."
Current Opinions, the Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs of the American
Medical Association ¶ 8.08 (1989). See also President's Commission for the
Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral Research,
Making Health Care Decisions 70 (1982); American College of Obstetricians &
Gynecologists, Standards for Obstetric-Gynecologic Services 62 (7th ed. 1989).
When a client becomes pregnant, the full range of therapeutic alternatives
includes the abortion option, and Title X counselors' interest in providing
this information is compelling.

75

The Government's articulated interest in distorting the doctor/patient
dialogue--ensuring that federal funds are not spent for a purpose outside the
scope of the program--falls far short of that necessary to justify the
suppression of truthful information and professional medical opinion regarding
constitutionally protected conduct.4 Moreover, the offending Regulation is not
narrowly tailored to serve this interest. For example, the governmental
interest at stake could be served by imposing rigorous bookkeeping standards
to ensure financial separation or adopting content-neutral rules for the
balanced dissemination of family-planning and health information. See
_Massachusetts v. Secretary of Health & Human Services,_ 899 F.2d 53, 74 (CA1
1990), cert. pending, No. 89-1929. By failing to balance or even to consider
the free speech interests claimed by Title X physicians against the
Government's asserted interest in suppressing the speech, the Court falters in
its duty to implement the protection that the First Amendment clearly provides
for this important message.

C

76

Finally, it is of no small significance that the speech the Secretary would
suppress is truthful information regarding constitutionally protected conduct
of vital importance to the listener. One can imagine no legitimate
governmental interest that might be served by suppressing such information.
Concededly, the abortion debate is among the most divisive and contentious
issues that our Nation has faced in recent years. "But freedom to differ is
not limited to things that do not matter much. That would be a mere shadow of
freedom. The test of its substance is the right to differ as to things that
touch the heart of the existing order." _West Virginia Board of Education v.
Barnette,_ 319 U.S. 624, 642, 63 S.Ct. 1178, 1187, 87 L.Ed. 1628 (1943).

III

77

By far the most disturbing aspect of today's ruling is the effect it will have
on the Fifth Amendment rights of the women who, supposedly, are beneficiaries
of Title X programs. The majority rejects petitioners' Fifth Amendment claims
summarily. It relies primarily upon the decisions in _Harris v. McRae,_ 448
U.S. 297, 100 S.Ct. 2671, 65 L.Ed.2d 784 (1980), and _Webster v. Reproductive
Health Services,_ 492 U.S. 490, 109 S.Ct. 3040, 106 L.Ed.2d 410 (1989). There
were dissents in those cases, and we continue to believe that they were
wrongly and unfortunately decided. Be that as it may, even if one accepts as
valid the Court's theorizing in those cases, the majority's reasoning in the
present cases is flawed.

78

Until today, the Court has allowed to stand only those restrictions upon
reproductive freedom that, while limiting the availability of abortion, have
left intact a woman's ability to decide without coercion whether she will
continue her pregnancy to term. _Maher v. Roe,_ 432 U.S. 464, 97 S.Ct. 2376,
53 L.Ed.2d 484 (1977), _McRae,_ and _Webster_ are all to this effect. Today's
decision abandons that principle, and with disastrous results.

79

Contrary to the majority's characterization, this is not a case in which
individuals seek government aid in exercising their fundamental rights. The
Fifth Amendment right asserted by petitioners is the right of a pregnant woman
to be free from affirmative governmental _interference_ in her decision. _Roe
v. Wade,_ 410 U.S. 113, 93 S.Ct. 705, 35 L.Ed.2d 147 (1973), and its progeny
are not so much about a medical procedure as they are about a woman's
fundamental right to self-determination. Those cases serve to vindicate the
idea that "liberty," if it means anything, must entail freedom from
governmental domination in making the most intimate and personal of decisions.
See, _e.g., Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health, Inc.,_ 462 U.S.
416, 444, 103 S.Ct. 2481, 2500, 76 L.Ed.2d 687 (1983) (governmental interest
in ensuring that pregnant women receive medically relevant information "will
not justify abortion regulations designed to influence the woman's informed
choice between abortion or childbirth"); _Maher v. Roe,_ 432 U.S., at 473, 97
S.Ct., at 2382 (noting that the Court's abortion cases "recognize a
constitutionally protected interest 'in making certain kinds of important
decisions' free from governmental compulsion," quoting _Whalen v. Roe,_ 429
U.S. 589, 599, 97 S.Ct. 869, 876, 51 L.Ed.2d 64 (1977)); see also _Harris v.
McRae,_ 448 U.S., at 312, 100 S.Ct., at 2685; _Thornburgh,_ 476 U.S., at 759,
106 ,S.Ct., at 2178; _Roe v. Wade,_ 410 U.S., at 169-170, 93 S.Ct., at 735
(Stewart, J., concurring). By suppressing medically pertinent information and
injecting a restrictive ideological message unrelated to considerations of
maternal health, the Government places formidable obstacles in the path of
Title X clients' freedom of choice and thereby violates their Fifth Amendment
rights.

80

It is crystal-clear that the aim of the challenged provisions an aim the
majority cannot escape noticing--is not simply to ensure that federal funds
are not used to perform abortions, but to "reduce the incidence of abortion."
42 CFR § 59.2 (1990) (in definition of "family planning"). As recounted above,
the Regulations require Title X physicians and counselors to provide
information pertaining only to childbirth, to refer a pregnant woman for
prenatal care irrespective of her medical situation, and, upon direct inquiry,
to respond that abortion is not an "appropriate method" of family planning.

81

The undeniable message conveyed by this forced speech, and the one that the
Title X client will draw from it, is that abortion nearly always is an
improper medical option. Although her physician's words, in fact, are strictly
controlled by the Government and wholly unrelated to her particular medical
situation, the Title X client will reasonably construe them as professional
advice to forgo her right to obtain an abortion. As would most rational
patients, many of these women will follow that perceived advice and carry
their pregnancy to term, despite their needs to the contrary and despite the
safety of the abortion procedure for the vast majority of them. Others,
delayed by the Regulations' mandatory prenatal referral, will be prevented
from acquiring abortions during the period in which the process is medically
sound and constitutionally protected.

82

In view of the inevitable effect of the Regulations, the majority's conclusion
that "[t]he difficulty that a woman encounters when a Title X project does not
provide abortion counseling or referral leaves her in no different position
than she would have been if the government had not enacted Title X," _ante,_
at 202, is insensitive and contrary to common human experience. Both the
purpose and result of the challenged Regulations is to deny women the ability
voluntarily to decide their procreative destiny. For these women, the
Government will have obliterated the freedom to choose as surely as if it had
banned abortions outright. The denial of this freedom is not a consequence of
poverty but of the Government's ill-intentioned distortion of information it
has chosen to provide.5

83

The substantial obstacles to bodily self-determination that the Regulations
impose are doubly offensive because they are effected by manipulating the very
words spoken by physicians and counselors to their patients. In our society,
the doctor/patient dialogue embodies a unique relationship of trust. The
specialized nature of medical science and the emotional distress often
attendant to health-related decisions requires that patients place their
complete confidence, and often their very lives, in the hands of medical
professionals. One seeks a physician's aid not only for medication or
diagnosis, but also for guidance, professional judgment, and vital emotional
support. Accordingly, each of us attaches profound importance and authority to
the words of advice spoken by the physician.

84

It is for this reason that we have guarded so jealously the doctor/patient
dialogue from governmental intrusion. "[I]n _Roe_ and subsequent cases we have
'stressed repeatedly the central role of the physician, both in consulting
with the woman about whether or not to have an abortion, and in determining
how any abortion was to be carried out.' " _Akron,_ 462 U.S., at 447, 103
S.Ct., at 2501, quoting _Colautti v. Franklin,_ 439 U.S. 379, 387, 99 S.Ct.
675, 681, 58 L.Ed.2d 596 (1979). See also _Thornburgh,_ 476 U.S., at 763, 106
S.Ct., at 2180. The majority's approval of the Secretary's Regulations flies
in the face of our repeated warnings that regulations tending to "confine the
attending physician in an undesired and uncomfortable straitjacket in the
practice of his profession," cannot endure. _Planned Parenthood of Central Mo.
v. Danforth,_ 428 U.S. 52, 67, n. 8, 96 S.Ct. 2831, 2840, n. 8, 49 L.Ed.2d 788
(1976).

85

The majority attempts to distinguish our holdings in _Akron_ and _Thornburgh_
on the post-hoc basis that the governmental intrusions into the doctor/patient
dialogue invalidated in those cases applied to _all_ physicians within a
jurisdiction while the Regulations now before the Court pertain to the narrow
class of healthcare professionals employed at Title X projects. _Ante,_ at
202. But the rights protected by the Constitution are _personal_ rights.
_Loving v. Virginia,_ 388 U.S. 1, 12, 87 S.Ct. 1817, 1823, 18 L.Ed.2d 1010
(1967); _Shelley v. Kraemer,_ 334 U.S. 1, 22, 68 S.Ct. 836, 846, 92 L.Ed. 1161
(1948). And for the individual woman, the deprivation of liberty by the
Government is no less substantial because it affects few rather than many. It
cannot be that an otherwise unconstitutional infringement of choice is made
lawful because it touches only some of the Nation's pregnant women and not all
of them.

86

The manipulation of the doctor/patient dialogue achieved through the
Secretary's Regulations is clearly an effort "to deter a woman from making a
decision that, with her physician, is hers to make." _Thornburgh,_ 476 U.S.,
at 759, 106 S.Ct., at 2178. As such, it violates the Fifth Amendment.6

IV

87

In its haste further to restrict the right of every woman to control her
reproductive freedom and bodily integrity, the majority disregards established
principles of law and contorts this Court's decided cases to arrive at its
preordained result. The majority professes to leave undisturbed the free
speech protections upon which our society has come to rely, but one must
wonder what force the First Amendment retains if it is read to countenance the
deliberate manipulation by the Government of the dialogue between a woman and
her physician. While technically leaving intact the fundamental right
protected by _Roe v. Wade,_ the Court, "through a relentlessly formalistic
catechism," _McRae,_ 448 U.S., at 341, 100 S.Ct., at 2707-2708 (MARSHALL, J.,
dissenting), once again has rendered the right's substance nugatory. See
_Webster v. Reproductive Health Services,_ 492 U.S., at 537, 109 S.Ct., at
3067 and at 560, 109 S.Ct., at 3079 (opinions concurring in part and
dissenting in part). This is a course nearly as noxious as overruling _Roe_
directly, for if a right is found to be unenforceable, even against flagrant
attempts by government to circumvent it, then it ceases to be a right at all.
This, I fear, may be the effect of today's decision.

88

Justice STEVENS, dissenting.

89

In my opinion, the Court has not paid sufficient attention to the language of
the controlling statute or to the consistent interpretation accorded the
statute by the responsible cabinet officers during four different Presidencies
and 18 years.

90

The relevant text of the "Family Planning Services and Population Research Act
of 1970" has remained unchanged since its enactment. 84 Stat. 1504. The
preamble to the Act states that it was passed:

91

"To promote public health and welfare by expanding, improving, and better
coordinating the family planning services and population research activities
of the Federal Government, and for other purposes." _Ibid._

92

The declaration of congressional purposes emphasizes the importance of
educating the public about family planning services. Thus, § 2 of the Act
states, in part, that the purpose of the Act is:

93

"(1) to assist in making comprehensive voluntary family planning services
readily available to all persons desiring such services;

94

. . . . .

95

"(5) to develop and make readily available information (including educational
materials) on family planning and population growth to all persons desiring
such information." 42 U.S.C. § 300 (Congressional Declaration of Purpose).

96

In contrast to the statutory emphasis on making relevant information readily
available to the public, the statute contains no suggestion that Congress
intended to authorize the suppression or censorship of any information by any
Government employee or by any grant recipient.

97

Section 6 of the Act authorizes the provision of federal funds to support the
establishment and operation of voluntary family planning projects. The section
also empowers the Secretary to promulgate regulations imposing conditions on
grant recipients to ensure that "such grants will be effectively utilized for
the purposes for which made." § 300a-4(b). Not a word in the statute, however,
authorizes the Secretary to impose any restrictions on the dissemination of
truthful information or professional advice by grant recipients.

98

The word "prohibition" is used only once in the Act. Section 6, which adds to
the Public Health Service Act the new Title X, covering the subject of
population research and voluntary planning programs, includes the following
provision:

99

"PROHIBITION OF ABORTION

100

"SEC. 1008. None of the funds appropriated under this title shall be used in
programs where abortion is a method of family planning." 84 Stat. 1508, 42
U.S.C. § 300a-6.

101

Read in the context of the entire statute, this prohibition is plainly
directed at conduct, rather than the dissemination of information or advice,
by potential grant recipients.

102

The original regulations promulgated in 1971 by the Secretary of Health,
Education and Welfare so interpreted the statute. This " 'contemporaneous
construction of [the] statute by the men charged with the responsibility of
setting its machinery in motion' " is entitled to particular respect. See
_Power Reactor Development Co. v. Electrical Workers,_ 367 U.S. 396, 408, 81
S.Ct. 1529, 1535, 6 L.Ed.2d 924 (1961) (citation omitted); _Udall v. Tallman,_
380 U.S. 1, 16, 85 S.Ct. 792, 801, 13 L.Ed.2d 616 (1965); _Aluminum Co. of
America v. Central Lincoln Peoples' Utility District,_ 467 U.S. 380, 390, 104
S.Ct. 2472, 2479, 81 L.Ed.2d 301 (1984). The regulations described the kind of
services that grant recipients had to provide in order to be eligible for
federal funding, but they did not purport to regulate or restrict the kinds of
advice or information that recipients might make available to their clients.
Conforming to the language of the governing statute, the regulations provided
that "[t]he project will not _provide_ abortions as a method of family
planning." 42 CFR § 59.5(a)(9) (1972) (emphasis added). Like the statute
itself, the regulations prohibited conduct, not speech.

103

The same is true of the regulations promulgated in 1986 by the Secretary of
Health and Human Services. They also prohibited grant recipients from
performing abortions but did not purport to censor or mandate any kind of
speech. See 42 CFR §§ 59.1-59.13 (1986).

104

The entirely new approach adopted by the Secretary in 1988 was not, in my
view, authorized by the statute. The new regulations did not merely reflect a
change in a policy determination that the Secretary had been authorized by
Congress to make. Cf. _Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense
Counsel, Inc.,_ 467 U.S. 837, 865, 104 S.Ct. 2778, 2792, 81 L.Ed.2d 694
(1984). Rather, they represented an assumption of policymaking responsibility
that Congress had not delegated to the Secretary. See _id.,_ at 842-843, 104
S.Ct., at 2781-2782 ("If the intent of Congress is clear, that is the end of
the matter; for the court, as well as the agency, must give effect to the
unambiguously expressed intent of Congress"). In a society that abhors
censorship and in which policymakers have traditionally placed the highest
value on the freedom to communicate, it is unrealistic to conclude that
statutory authority to regulate conduct implicitly authorized the Executive to
regulate speech.

105

Because I am convinced that the 1970 Act did not authorize the Secretary to
censor the speech of grant recipients or their employees, I would hold the
challenged regulations invalid and reverse the judgment of the Court of
Appeals.

106

Even if I thought the statute were ambiguous, however, I would reach the same
result for the reasons stated in Justice O'CONNOR's dissenting opinion. As she
also explains, if a majority of the Court had reached this result, it would be
improper to comment on the constitutional issues that the parties have
debated. Because the majority has reached out to decide the constitutional
questions, however, I am persuaded that Justice BLACKMUN is correct in
concluding that the majority's arguments merit a response. I am also persuaded
that Justice BLACKMUN has correctly analyzed these issues. I have therefore
joined Parts II and III of his opinion.

107

Justice O'CONNOR, dissenting.

108

"[W]here an otherwise acceptable construction of a statute would raise serious
constitutional problems, the Court will construe the statute to avoid such
problems unless such construction is plainly contrary to the intent of
Congress." _Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Building &
Construction Trades Council,_ 485 U.S. 568, 575, 108 S.Ct. 1392, 1397, 99
L.Ed.2d 645 (1988). Justice BLACKMUN has explained well why this long-standing
canon of statutory construction applies in this case, and I join Part I of his
dissent. Part II demonstrates why the challenged regulations, which constitute
the Secretary's interpretation of § 1008 of the Public Health Service Act, 84
Stat. 1508, 42 U.S.C. § 300a-6, "raise serious constitutional problems": the
regulations place content-based restrictions on the speech of Title X fund
recipients, restrictions directed precisely at speech concerning one of "the
most divisive and contentious issues that our Nation has faced in recent
years." _Ante,_ at 215.

109

One may well conclude, as Justice BLACKMUN does in Part II, that the
regulations are unconstitutional for this reason. I do not join Part II of the
dissent, however, for the same reason that I do not join Part III, in which
Justice BLACKMUN concludes that the regulations are unconstitutional under the
Fifth Amendment. The canon of construction that Justice BLACKMUN correctly
applies here is grounded in large part upon our time-honored practice of not
reaching constitutional questions unnecessarily. See _DeBartolo, supra,_ at
575, 108 S.Ct., at 1397. "It is a fundamental rule of judicial restraint . . .
that this Court will not reach constitutional questions in advance of the
necessity of deciding them." _Three Affiliated Tribes of Fort Berthold
Reservation v. Wold Engineering, P.C.,_ 467 U.S. 138, 157, 104 S.Ct. 2267,
2279, 81 L.Ed.2d 113 (1984). See also _Alexander v._ _Louisiana,_ 405 U.S.
625, 633, 92 S.Ct. 1221, 1226, 31 L.Ed.2d 536 (1972); _Burton v. United
States,_ 196 U.S. 283, 295, 25 S.Ct. 243, 245, 49 L.Ed. 482 (1905);
_Liverpool, New York and Philadelphia S.S. Co. v. Commissioners of
Emigration,_ 113 U.S. 33, 39, 5 S.Ct. 352, 355, 28 L.Ed. 899 (1885) (In the
exercise of its jurisdiction to pronounce unconstitutional laws of the United
States, this Court "has rigidly adhered" to the rule "never to anticipate a
question of constitutional law in advance of the necessity of deciding it").

110

This Court acts at the limits of its power when it invalidates a law on
constitutional grounds. In recognition of our place in the constitutional
scheme, we must act with "great gravity and delicacy" when telling a
coordinate branch that its actions are absolutely prohibited absent
constitutional amendment. _Adkins v. Children's Hospital of District of
Columbia,_ 261 U.S. 525, 544, 43 S.Ct. 394, 396, 67 L.Ed. 785 (1923). See also
_Blodgett v. Holden,_ 275 U.S. 142, 147-148, 48 S.Ct. 105, 106-107, 72 L.Ed.
206 (1927) (Holmes, J., concurring). In this case, we need only tell the
Secretary that his regulations are not a reasonable interpretation of the
statute; we need not tell Congress that it cannot pass such legislation. If we
rule solely on statutory grounds, Congress retains the power to force the
constitutional question by legislating more explicitly. It may instead choose
to do nothing. That decision should be left to Congress; we should not tell
Congress what it cannot do before it has chosen to do it. It is enough in this
case to conclude that neither the language nor the history of § 1008 compels
the Secretary's interpretation, and that the interpretation raises serious
First Amendment concerns. On this basis alone, I would reverse the judgment of
the Court of Appeals and invalidate the challenged regulations.

1

Both the First Circuit and the Tenth Circuit have invalidated the regulations,
primarily on constitutional grounds. See _Massachusetts v. Secretary of Health
and Human Services,_ 899 F.2d 53 (CA1 1990); _Planned Parenthood Federation of
America v. Sullivan,_ 913 F.2d 1492 (CA10 1990).

2

"Most clients of title X-sponsored clinics are not pregnant and generally
receive only physical examinations, education on contraceptive methods, and
services related to birth control." General Accounting Office Report, App. at
95.

3

For instance, the Secretary relies on the following passage of the House
Report as evidence that the regulations are consistent with legislative
intent:

"It is, and has been, the intent of both Houses that the funds authorized
under this legislation be used only to support preventive family planning
services, population research, infertility services, and other related
medical, informational, and educational activities. The conferees have adopted
the language contained in section 1008, which prohibits the use of such funds
for abortion, in order to make this intent clear." H.R.Conf.Rep. No. 91-1667,
p. 8 (1970), U.S.Code Cong. & Admin.News 1970, pp. 5081-82.

Petitioners, however, point to language in the statement of purpose in the
House Report preceding the passage of Title X stressing the importance of
supplying both family planning information and a full range of family planning
information and of developing a comprehensive and coordinated program.
Petitioners also rely on the Senate Report, which states:

"The committee does not view family planning as merely a euphemism for birth
control. It is properly a part of comprehensive health care and should consist
of much more than the dispensation of contraceptive devices. . . . [A]
successful family planning program must contain . . . [m]edical services,
including consultation examination, prescription, and continuing supervision,
supplies, instruction, and referral to other medical services as needed."
S.Rep. No. 91-1004, p. 10 (1970).

These directly conflicting statements of legislative intent demonstrate amply
the inadequacies of the "traditional tools of statutory construction,"
_Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Cardoza-Fonseca,_ 480 U.S., [421]
at 446-447, 107 S.Ct. 1207, 1221, 94 L.Ed.2d 434, in resolving the issue
before us.

4

We also find that, on their face, the regulations are narrowly tailored to fit
Congress' intent in Title X that federal funds not be used to "promote or
advocate" abortion as a "method of family planning." The regulations are
designed to ensure compliance with the prohibition of § 1008 that none of the
funds appropriated under Title X be used in a program where abortion is a
method of family planning. We have recognized that Congress' power to allocate
funds for public purposes includes an ancillary power to ensure that those
funds are properly applied to the prescribed use. See _South Dakota v. Dole,_
483 U.S. 203, 207-209, 107 S.Ct. 2793, 2796-2797, 97 L.Ed.2d 171 (1987)
(upholding against Tenth Amendment challenge requirement that States raise
drinking age as condition to receipt of federal highway funds); _Buckley v.
Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 99, 96 S.Ct. 612, 673, 46 L.Ed.2d 659 (1976).

5

Petitioners also contend that the regulations violate the First Amendment by
penalizing speech funded with non-Title X monies. They argue that since Title
X requires that grant recipients contribute to the financing of Title X
projects through the use of matching funds and grant-related income, the
regulation's restrictions on abortion counseling and advocacy penalize
privately funded speech.

We find this argument flawed for several reasons. First, Title X subsidies are
just that, subsidies. The recipient is in no way compelled to operate a Title
X project; to avoid the force of the regulations, it can simply decline the
subsidy. See _Grove City College v. Bell,_ 465 U.S. 555, 575, 104 S.Ct. 1211,
1222, 79 L.Ed.2d 516 (1984) (petitioner's First Amendment rights not violated
because it "may terminate its participation in the [federal] program and thus
avoid the requirements of [the federal program]"). By accepting Title X funds,
a recipient voluntarily consents to any restrictions placed on any matching
funds or grant-related income. Potential grant recipients can choose between
accepting Title X funds--subject to the Government's conditions that they
provide matching funds and forgo abortion counseling and referral in the Title
X project--or declining the subsidy and financing their own unsubsidized
program. We have never held that the Government violates the First Amendment
simply by offering that choice. Second, the Secretary's regulations apply only
to Title X programs. A recipient is therefore able to "limi[t] the use of its
federal funds to [Title X] activities." _FCC v. League of Women Voters of
Cal.,_ 468 U.S. 364, at 400, 104 S.Ct. 3106, at 3128, 82 L.Ed.2d 278 (1984).
It is in no way "barred from using even wholly private funds to finance" its
pro-abortion activities outside the Title X program. _Ibid._ The regulations
are limited to Title X funds; the recipient remains free to use private, non-
Title X funds to finance abortion-related activities.

1

The majority states: "There is no question but that the statutory prohibition
contained in § 1008 is constitutional." _Ante,_ at 192. This statement simply
begs the question. Were the Court to read § 1008 to prohibit only the actual
performance of abortions with Title X funds--as, indeed, the Secretary did
until February 2, 1988, see 53 Fed.Reg. 2923 (1988)--the provision would fall
within the category of restrictions that the Court upheld in _Harris v.
McRae,_ 448 U.S. 297, 100 S.Ct. 2671, 65 L.Ed.2d 784 (1980), and _Maher v.
Roe,_ 432 U.S. 464, 97 S.Ct. 2376, 53 L.Ed.2d 484 (1977). By interpreting the
statute to authorize the regulation of abortion-related speech between
physician and patient, however, the Secretary, and now the Court, have
rejected a constitutionally sound construction in favor of one that is by no
means clearly constitutional.

2

In addition to requiring referral for prenatal care and adoption services, the
Regulations permit general health services such as physical examinations,
screening for breast cancer, treatment of gynecological problems, and
treatment for sexually transmitted diseases. 53 Fed.Reg. 2927 (1988). None of
the latter are strictly preventive, preconceptional services.

3

The majority attempts to obscure the breadth of its decision through its
curious contention that "the Title X program regulations do not significantly
impinge upon the doctor-patient relationship." _Ante,_ at 200. That the
doctor-patient relationship is substantially burdened by a rule prohibiting
the dissemination by the physician of pertinent medical information is beyond
serious dispute. This burden is undiminished by the fact that the relationship
at issue here is not an "all-encompassing" one. A woman seeking the services
of a Title X clinic has every reason to expect, as do we all, that her
physician will not withhold relevant information regarding the very purpose of
her visit. To suggest otherwise is to engage in uninformed fantasy. Further,
to hold that the doctor-patient relationship is somehow incomplete where a
patient lacks the resources to seek comprehensive healthcare from a single
provider is to ignore the situation of a vast number of Americans. As Justice
MARSHALL has noted in a different context: "It is perfectly proper for judges
to disagree about what the Constitution requires. But it is disgraceful for an
interpretation of the Constitution to be premised upon unfounded assumptions
about how people live." _United States v. Kras,_ 409 U.S. 434, 460, 93 S.Ct.
631, 646, 34 L.Ed.2d 626 (1973) (dissenting opinion).

4

It is to be noted that the Secretary has made no claim that the Regulations at
issue reflect any concern for the health or welfare of Title X clients.

5

In the context of common-law tort liability, commentators have recognized: "If
there is no duty to go to the assistance of a person in difficulty or peril,
there is at least a duty to avoid any affirmative acts which make his
situation worse. . . . The same is true, of course, of a physician who accepts
a charity patient. Such a defendant will then be liable for a failure to use
reasonable care for the protection of the plaintiff's interests." P. Keeton et
al., Prosser and Keeton on the Law of Torts 378 (5th ed. 1984) (footnotes
omitted). This observation seems equally appropriate to the cases at bar.

6

Significantly, the Court interprets the challenged regulations to allow a
Title X project to refer a woman whose health would be seriously endangered by
continued pregnancy to an abortion provider. _Ante,_ at 195. To hold otherwise
would be to adopt an interpretation that would most certainly violate a
patient's right to substantive due process. See, _e.g.,_ _Youngberg v. Romeo,_
457 U.S. 307, 102 S.Ct. 2452, 73 L.Ed.2d 28 (1982); _Revere v. Massachusetts
General Hospital,_ 463 U.S. 239, 103 S.Ct. 2979, 77 L.Ed.2d 605 (1983). The
Solicitor General at oral argument, however, afforded the Regulations a far
less charitable interpretation. See Tr. of Oral Arg. 44-47.

