465 U.S. 208

104 S.Ct. 1020

79 L.Ed.2d 249

UNITED BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION TRADES COUNCIL OF CAMDEN COUNTY AND VICINITY,
Appellant  
v.  
MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF the CITY OF CAMDEN et al.

No. 81-2110.

Argued Nov. 28, 1983.

Decided Feb. 21, 1984.

_Syllabus_

Acting pursuant to a statewide affirmative-action program, the city of Camden,
N.J., adopted an ordinance requiring that at least 40% of the employees of
contractors and subcontractors working on city construction projects be Camden
residents. After the ordinance was approved by the New Jersey Treasury
Department, appellant, an association of labor organizations representing
private employees in the building and construction trades, filed an appeal
with the Appellate Division of the New Jersey Superior Court challenging the
Treasury Department's approval of the ordinance. The New Jersey Supreme Court
certified the appeal directly to that court and rejected appellant's
challenges to the ordinance's validity, including the claim that the ordinance
violated the Privileges and Immunities Clause of Art. IV of the Federal
Constitution. The court held that the Clause did not apply because the
ordinance discriminated on the basis of _municipal,_ not state, residency and
had identical effects upon out-of-state citizens and New Jersey citizens not
residing in Camden.

_Held:_

1\. The ordinance is properly subject to the strictures of the Privileges and
Immunities Clause. Pp. 214-218.

(a) That the ordinance is a municipal, rather than a state, law does not place
it outside the Clause's scope. Here, municipal action cannot be distinguished
easily from state action, since the ordinance would not have gone into effect
without the Treasury Department's approval. Moreover, a municipality is merely
a political subdivision of the State, and what would be unconstitutional if
done directly by the State can no more readily be accomplished by a city
deriving its authority from the State. Pp. 214-215.

(b) The Clause applies not only to laws that discriminate on the basis of
state citizenship, but also to laws that discriminate on the basis of
municipal residency. For purposes of analysis of most cases under the Clause,
the terms "citizen" and "resident" are essentially interchangeable. Camden's
ordinance is not immune from constitutional review at the behest of out-of-
state residents merely because in-state residents who do not live in Camden
are similarly disadvantaged. While such in-state residents have no claim under
the Clause, nevertheless they at least have a chance to remedy at the polls
the discrimination against them. Pp. 215-218.

2\. On remand, the determination of whether the Camden ordinance violates the
Privileges and Immunities Clause should be made under the appropriate
constitutional standard, which requires determination of whether the ordinance
burdens one of those privileges and immunities protected by the Clause, and,
if so, whether there is a "substantial reason" for the discrimination against
citizens of other States. Pp. 218-223.

(a) Although Camden may, without fear of violating the Commerce Clause,
pressure private employers engaged in public works projects funded in whole or
in part by the city to hire city residents, cf. _White v. Massachusetts
Council of Construction Employers,_ 460 U.S. ----, 103 S.Ct. 1042, 75 L.Ed.2d
1, an out-of-state resident's interest in employment by private employers on
public works projects in another State is sufficiently fundamental to the
promotion of interstate harmony and sufficiently basic to the livelihood of
the Nation as to fall within the purview of the Privileges and Immunities
Clause. Pp. 218-222.

(b) However, it is impossible on the record as it now stands to evaluate
Camden's contention that its ordinance is carefully tailored to counteract
grave economic and social ills involving unemployment of city residents and a
sharp decline in the city's population. On remand, the New Jersey Supreme
Court may decide, consistent with state procedures, on the best method for
making the necessary findings of fact. Pp. 222-223.

88 N.J. 317, 443 A.2d 148 (1982), reversed and remanded.

Steven K. Kudatzky, Haddonfield, N.J., for appellant.

N. Thomas Foster, Camden, N.J., for appellees.

Justice REHNQUIST delivered the opinionof the Court.

1

A municipal ordinance of the city of Camden, New Jersey requires that at least
40% of the employees of contractors and subcontractors working on city
construction projects be Camden residents. Appellant, the United Building and
Construction Trades Council of Camden and Vicinity (the Council), challenges
that ordinance as a violation of the Privileges and Immunities Clause, Article
IV, ยง 2, of the United States Constitution.1 The Supreme Court of New Jersey
rejected appellant's privileges and immunities attack on the ground that the
ordinance discriminates on the basis of _municipal,_ not state, residency. The
court "decline[d] to apply the Privileges and Immunities Clause in the context
of a municipal ordinance that has identical effects upon out-of-state citizens
and New Jersey citizens not residing in the locality." 88 N.J. 317, 342, 443
A.2d 148, 160 (1982). We conclude that the challenged ordinance is properly
subject to the strictures of the Clause. We therefore reverse the judgment of
the Supreme Court of New Jersey and remand the case for a determination of the
validity of the ordinance under the appropriate constitutional standard.

2

On August 28, 1980, the Camden City Council, acting pursuant to a state-wide
affirmative action program,2 adopted an ordinance setting minority hiring
"goals" on all public works contracts. Ordinance MC 1650, Pet., at A36. The
ordinance also created a hiring preference for Camden residents, with a
separate one-year residency requirement triggering eligibility for that
preference. _Id.,_ at ยง I(5), Pet., at A38. As subsequently amended, the
ordinance requires that on all construction projects funded by the city:3

3

"The developer/contractor, in hiring for jobs, shall make every effort to
employ persons residing within the City of Camden but, in no event, shall less
than forty percent (40%) of the entire labor force be residents of the City of
Camden." Ordinance MC 1653 ยง C(IV)(b), Pet., at A56.

4

The contractor is also obliged to ensure that any subcontractors working on
such projects adhere to the same requirement. Ordinance MC 1650 ยง VIII, Pet.,
at A46.

5

The amended ordinance was submitted for approval to the Chief Affirmative
Action Officer of the New Jersey Treasury Department in November, 1980.
Following brief administrative proceedings, the ordinance was designated as a
state-approved affirmative action construction program. Appellant, an
association of labor organizations representing private employees in the
building and construction trades in various New Jersey counties,4 filed a
Notice of Appeal with the Appellate Division of the New Jersey Superior Court
challenging the final determination of the Treasury Department in approving
the Camden plan. The New Jersey Supreme Court certified the appeal directly to
that court to decide all the issues in the case.

6

Appellant challenged state approval of the resident hiring quota as _ultra
vires,_ and as unconstitutional under the Commerce Clause and the Privileges
and Immunities Clause of Article IV of the United States Constitution and
under the 14th amendment's Equal Protection Clause.5 The New Jersey court
sustained the Treasurer's action as consistent both with state law and the
federal constitution. Citing _Reeves, Inc. v. Stake,_ 447 U.S. 429, 100 S.Ct.
2271, 65 L.Ed.2d 244 (1980), and _Hughes v. Alexandria Scrap Corp.,_ 426 U.S.
794, 96 S.Ct. 2488, 49 L.Ed.2d 220 (1976), the court held that the resident
quota was not subject to challenge under the Commerce Clause because the State
was acting as a market participant rather than as a market regulator. 88 N.J.,
at 338-341, 443 A.2d 148. The court also held that the quota did not violate
the Privileges and Immunities Clause because it was not aimed primarily at
out-of-state residents. "It almost certainly affects more New Jersey residents
not living in Camden than it does out-of-state residents. Because the Camden
ordinance does not affect 'the States' . . . treatment of each other's
residents,' . . . it does not violate any privilege of state citizenship."
_Id.,_ at 341-342, 443 A.2d 148. Finally, the New Jersey Supreme Court held
that the one-year residency requirement did not violate the right to travel
protected by the Equal Protection Clause, concluding that only a rational
basis is required to uphold a residency requirement for city employment.
_Id.,_ at 342-343, 443 A.2d 148.

7

Appellant then filed this appeal raising the same three constitutional
challenges to the resident hiring quota. We noted probable jurisdiction. ---
U.S. ----, 103 S.Ct. 1270, 75 L.Ed.2d 492 (1983). Since the Council filed its
appeal, however, there have been two significant changes in the posture of the
case. First, the Court decided _White v. Massachusetts Council of Const.
Employers,_ \--- U.S. ----, 103 S.Ct. 1042, 75 L.Ed.2d 1 (1983), which held
that an executive order of the Mayor of Boston, requiring that at least 50% of
all jobs on construction projects funded in whole or part by city funds be
filled by bona fide city residents, was immune from scrutiny under the
Commerce Clause because Boston was acting as a market participant rather than
as a market regulator. In light of the decision in _White,_ appellant has
abandoned its Commerce Clause challenge to the Camden ordinance.

8

Second, in July, 1983 Camden amended its affirmative action plan. The one-year
residency requirement was deleted, thereby mooting appellant's equal
protection challenge based on that durational requirement. Now, a resident of
the city of Camden is defined simply as "any person who resides in the City of
Camden." Brief of Appellees, Mayor and Council of the City of Camden, at A-5.
Also, the scope of the ordinance was clarified.6 It now applies to any
construction project "which is funded in whole or in part with City funds or
funds which the City expends or administers in accordance with the terms of a
grant." _Id.,_ at A-4. Finally, the 40% resident hiring requirement was
changed from a strict "quota" to a "goal" with which developers and
contractors must make "every good faith effort" to comply. _Id.,_ at A-13.

9

Because of these changes, the only question left for our consideration is
whether the Camden ordinance, as now written, violates the Privileges and
Immunities Clause.7 We first address the argument, accepted by the Supreme
Court of New Jersey, that the Clause does not even apply to a _municipal_
ordinance such as this. Two separate contentions are advanced in support of
this position: first, that the Clause only applies to laws passed by a _State_
and, second, that the Clause only applies to laws that discriminate on the
basis of _state_ citizenship.

10

The first argument can be quickly rejected. The fact that the ordinance in
question is a municipal, rather than a state, law does not somehow place it
outside the scope of the Privileges and Immunities Clause. First of all, one
cannot easily distinguish municipal from state action in this case: the
municipal ordinance would not have gone into effect without express approval
by the State Treasurer. As the New Jersey Supreme Court noted in discussing
the constitutionality of the minority hiring goals:

11

"By approving the Camden plan, the State Treasurer has established a minority
hiring goal for the City of Camden that operates no differently than every
other minority hiring goal established by the State Treasurer.... The
Council's constitutional challenge to the Camden minority hiring goal must
therefore be interpreted as a challenge to the State Treasurer's general power
to issue affirmative action hiring goals." 88 N.J., at 330, 443 A.2d 148.

12

The constitutional challenge to the resident hiring preference, therefore,
must also "be interpreted as a challenge to the State Treasurer's general
power" to adopt such a preference.8 The New Jersey court specifically found
that the State Treasurer's approval of the resident hiring preference was "not
_ultra vires_ or an abuse of discretion." _Id.,_ at 329, 443 A.2d 148.

13

More fundamentally, a municipality is merely a political subdivision of the
State from which its authority derives. _City of Trenton v. New Jersey,_ 262
U.S. 182, 187, 43 S.Ct. 534, 536, 67 L.Ed. 937 (1923). It is as true of the
Privileges and Immunities Clause as of the Equal Protection Clause that what
would be unconstitutional if done directly by the State can no more readily be
accomplished by a city deriving its authority from the State. _Memorial
Hospital v. Maricopa County,_ 415 U.S. 250, 256, 94 S.Ct. 1076, 1081, 39
L.Ed.2d 306 (1974); _Avery v. Midland County,_ 390 U.S. 474, 480-481, 88 S.Ct.
1114, 1118-1119, 20 L.Ed.2d 45 (1968). Thus, even if the ordinance had been
adopted solely by Camden, and not pursuant to a state program or with state
approval, the hiring preference would still have to comport with the
Privileges and Immunities Clause.

14

The second argument merits more consideration. The New Jersey Supreme Court
concluded that the Privileges and Immunities Clause does not apply to an
ordinance that discriminates solely on the basis of _municipal_ residency. The
Clause is phrased in terms of _state_ citizenship and was designed "to place
the citizens of each State upon the same footing with citizens of other
States, so far as the advantages resulting from citizenship in those States
are concerned." _Paul v. Virginia,_ 8 Wall. 168, 180, 19 L.Ed. 357 (1869). See
also _Hicklin v. Orbeck,_ 437 U.S. 518, 523-524, 98 S.Ct. 2482, 2486-2487, 57
L.Ed.2d 397 (1978); _Ward v. Maryland,_ 79 U.S. 418, 430, 12 Wall. 418, 430,
20 L.Ed. 449 (1871).

15

"The primary purpose of this clause, like the clauses between which it is
located--those relating to full faith and credit and to interstate extradition
of fugitives from justice--was to help fuse into one Nation a collection of
independent, sovereign States. It was designed to insure to a citizen of State
A who ventures into State B the same privileges which the citizens of State B
enjoy. For protection of such equality the citizen of State A was not to be
restricted to the uncertain remedies afforded by diplomatic processes and
official retaliation." _Toomer v. Witsell,_ 334 U.S. 385, 395, 68 S.Ct. 1156,
1162, 92 L.Ed. 1460 (1948).

16

Municipal residency classifications, it is argued, simply do not give rise to
the same concerns.

17

We cannot accept this argument. We have never read the Clause so literally as
to apply it only to distinctions based on state citizenship. For example, in
_Mullaney v. Anderson,_ 342 U.S. 415, 419-420, 72 S.Ct. 428, 431-432, 96 L.Ed.
458 (1952), the Court held that the Alaska Territory had no more freedom to
discriminate against those not residing in the Territory than did any State to
favor its own citizens. And despite some initial uncertainty, compare _Travis
v. Yale & Towne Mfg. Co.,_ 252 U.S. 60, 78-79, 40 S.Ct. 228, 231-232, 64 L.Ed.
460 (1920), and _Blake v. McClung,_ 172 U.S. 239, 246-247, 19 S.Ct. 165,
168-169, 43 L.Ed. 432 (1898), with _Douglas v. New York, Haven R. Co.,_ 279
U.S. 377, 386-387, 49 S.Ct. 355, 356, 73 L.Ed. 747 (1929), and _La Tourette v.
McMaster,_ 248 U.S. 465, 469-470, 39 S.Ct. 160, 161-162, 63 L.Ed. 362 (1919),
it is now established that the terms "citizen" and "resident" are "essentially
interchangeable," _Austin v. New Hampshire,_ 420 U.S. 656, 662, n. 8, 95 S.Ct.
1191, 1195, n. 8, 43 L.Ed.2d 530 (1975), for purposes of analysis of most
cases under the Privileges and Immunities Clause. See _Hicklin v. Orbeck,_ 437
U.S. 518, 524, n. 8, 98 S.Ct. 2482, 2486, n. 8, 57 L.Ed.2d 397 (1978); _Toomer
v. Witsell,_ 334 U.S. 385, 397, 68 S.Ct. 1156, 1162, 92 L.Ed.1460 (1948). A
person who is not residing in a given State is _ipso facto_ not residing in a
city within that State. Thus, whether the exercise of a privilege is
conditioned on state residency or on municipal residency he will just as
surely be excluded.

18

Given the Camden ordinance, an out-of-state citizen who ventures into New
Jersey will not enjoy the same privileges as the New Jersey citizen residing
in Camden. It is true that New Jersey citizens not residing in Camden will be
affected by the ordinance as well as out-of-state citizens. And it is true
that the disadvantaged New Jersey residents have no claim under the Privileges
and Immunities Clause. _The Slaughter-House Cases,_ 16 Wall. 36, 77, 21 L.Ed.
394 (1872). But New Jersey residents at least have a chance to remedy at the
polls any discrimination against them. Out-of-state citizens have no similar
opportunity, _Austin v. New Hampshire,_ 420 U.S. 656, 662, 95 S.Ct. 1191,
1195, 43 L.Ed.2d 530 (1975), and they must "not be restricted to the uncertain
remedies afforded by diplomatic processes and official retaliation." _Toomer
v. Witsell,_ 334 U.S. 385, 395, 68 S.Ct. 1156, 1162, 92 L.Ed. 1460 (1948).9 We
conclude that Camden's ordinance is not immune from constitutional review at
the behest of out-of-state residents merely because some in-state residents
are similarly disadvantaged. Cf. _Zobel v. Williams,_ 457 U.S. 55, 75, 102
S.Ct. 2309, 2320, 72 L.Ed.2d 672 (1982) (O'CONNOR, J., concurring).

19

Application of the Privileges and Immunities Clause to a particular instance
of discrimination against out-of-state residents entails a two-step inquiry.
As an initial matter, the court must decide whether the ordinance burdens one
of those privileges and immunities protected by the Clause. _Baldwin v.
Montana Fish and Game Comm'n,_ 436 U.S. 371, 383, 98 S.Ct. 1852, 1860, 56
L.Ed.2d 354 (1978). Not all forms of discrimination against citizens of other
States are constitutionally suspect.

20

"Some distinctions between residents and nonresidents merely reflect the fact
that this is a Nation composed of individual States, and are permitted; other
distinctions are prohibited because they hinder the formation, the purpose, or
the development of a single Union of those States. Only with respect to those
'privileges' and 'immunities' bearing upon the vitality of the Nation as a
single entity must the State treat all citizens, resident and nonresident,
equally." _Ibid._

21

As a threshold matter, then, we must determine whether an out-of-state
resident's interest in employment on public works contracts in another State
is sufficiently "fundamental" to the promotion of interstate harmony so as to
"fall within the purview of the Privileges and Immunities Clause." _Id.,_ at
388, 98 S.Ct., at 1862. See also _Canadian Northern Ry. Co. v. Eggen,_ 252
U.S. 553, 560, 40 S.Ct. 402, 403, 64 L.Ed. 713 (1920); _Blake v. McClung,_ 172
U.S. 239, 248, 19 S.Ct. 165, 169, 43 L.Ed. 432 (1898).

22

Certainly, the pursuit of a common calling is one of the most fundamental of
those privileges protected by the Clause. _Baldwin v. Montana Fish and Game
Comm'n,_ 436 U.S. 371, 387, 98 S.Ct. 1852, 1862, 56 L.Ed.2d 354 (1978). Many,
if not most, of our cases expounding the Privileges and Immunities Clause have
dealt with this basic and essential activity. See, _e.g., Hicklin v. Orbeck,_
437 U.S. 518, 98 S.Ct. 2482, 57 L.Ed.2d 397 (1978); _Austin v. New Hampshire,_
420 U.S. 656, 95 S.Ct. 1191, 43 L.Ed.2d 530 (1975); _Mullaney v. Anderson,_
342 U.S. 415, 72 S.Ct. 428, 96 L.Ed. 458 (1952); _Toomer v. Witsell,_ 334 U.S.
385, 68 S.Ct. 1156, 92 L.Ed. 1460 (1948); _Ward v. Maryland,_ 79 U.S. 418, 12
Wall. 418, 20 L.Ed. 449 (1871). Public employment, however, is qualitatively
different from employment in the private sector; it is a subspecies of the
broader opportunity to pursue a common calling. We have held that there is no
fundamental right to government employment for purposes of the Equal
Protection Clause. _Massachusetts v. Murgia,_ 427 U.S. 307, 313, 96 S.Ct.
2562, 2566, 49 L.Ed.2d 520 (1976) ( _per curiam_ ). _Cf. McCarthy v.
Philadelphia Civil Service Comm'n,_ 424 U.S. 645, 96 S.Ct. 1154, 47 L.Ed.2d
366 (1976) ( _per curiam_ ) (rejecting equal protection challenge to municipal
residency requirement for municipal workers). And in _White,_ 103 S.Ct., at
1046, n. 7, we held that for purposes of the Commerce Clause everyone employed
on a city public works project is, "in a substantial if informal sense,
'working for the city.' "

23

It can certainly be argued that for purposes of the Privileges and Immunities
Clause everyone affected by the Camden ordinance is also "working for the
city" and, therefore, has no grounds for complaint when the city favors its
own residents. But we decline to transfer mechanically into this context an
analysis fashioned to fit the Commerce Clause. Our decision in _White_ turned
on a distinction between the city acting as a market participant and the city
acting as a market regulator. The question whether employees of contractors
and subcontractors on public works projects were or were not, in some sense,
working for the city was crucial to that analysis. The question had to be
answered in order to chart the boundaries of the distinction. But the
distinction between market participant and market regulator relied upon in
_White_ to dispose of the Commerce Clause challenge is not dispositive in this
context. The two Clauses have different aims and set different standards for
state conduct.

24

The Commerce Clause acts as an implied restraint upon state regulatory powers.
Such powers must give way before the superior authority of Congress to
legislate on (or leave unregulated) matters involving interstate commerce.
When the State acts solely as a market participant, no conflict between state
_regulation_ and federal regulatory authority can arise. _White,_ 103 S.Ct.,
at 1044; _Reeves, Inc. v. Stake,_ 447 U.S. 429, 436-437, 100 S.Ct. 2271,
2277-2278, 65 L.Ed.2d 244 (1980); _Hughes v. Alexandria Scrap Corp.,_ 426 U.S.
794, 810, 96 S.Ct. 2488, 2498, 49 L.Ed.2d 220 (1976). The Privileges and
Immunities Clause, on the other hand, imposes a direct restraint on state
action in the interests of interstate harmony. _Hicklin v. Orbeck,_ 437 U.S.
518, 523-524, 98 S.Ct. 2482, 2486-2487, 57 L.Ed.2d 397 (1978); _Ward v.
Maryland,_ 79 U.S. 418, 430, 12 Wall. 418, 430, 20 L.Ed. 449 (1871); _Paul v.
Virginia,_ 8 Wall. 168, 180, 19 L.Ed. 357 (1869). This concern with comity
cuts across the market regulator-market participant distinction that is
crucial under the Commerce Clause. It is discrimination against out-of-state
residents on matters of fundamental concern which triggers the Clause, not
regulation affecting interstate commerce. Thus, the fact that Camden is merely
setting conditions on its expenditures for goods and services in the
marketplace does not preclude the possibility that those conditions violate
the Privileges and Immunities Clause.

25

In _Hicklin v. Orbeck,_ 437 U.S. 518, 98 S.Ct. 2482, 57 L.Ed.2d 397 (1978), we
struck down as a violation of the Privileges and Immunities Clause an "Alaska
Hire" statute containing a resident hiring preference for all employment
related to the development of the State's oil and gas resources.10 Alaska
argued in that case "that because the oil and gas that are the subject of
Alaska Hire are _owned_ by the State, this ownership, of itself, is sufficient
justification for the Act's discrimination against nonresidents, and takes the
Act totally without the scope of the Privileges and Immunities Clause." _Id.,_
at 528, 98 S.Ct., at 2489. We concluded, however, that the State's interest in
controlling those things it claims to own is not absolute. "Rather than
placing a statute completely beyond the Clause, a State's ownership of the
property with which the statute is concerned is a factor--although often the
crucial factor--to be considered in evaluating whether the statute's
discrimination against noncitizens violates the Clause." _Id.,_ at 529, 98
S.Ct., at 2489. See also _Baldwin v. Montana Fish and Game Comm'n,_ 436 U.S.
371, 385, 98 S.Ct. 1852, 1861, 56 L.Ed.2d 354 (1978). Much the same analysis,
we think, is appropriate to a city's efforts to bias private employment
decisions in favor of its residents on construction projects funded with
public monies. The fact that Camden is expending its own funds or funds it
administers in accordance with the terms of a grant is certainly a factor--
perhaps the crucial factor--to be considered in evaluating whether the
statute's discrimination violates the Privileges and Immunities Clause. But it
does not remove the Camden ordinance completely from the purview of the
Clause.

26

In sum, Camden may, without fear of violating the Commerce Clause, pressure
private employers engaged in public works projects funded in whole or in part
by the city to hire city residents. But that same exercise of power to bias
the employment decisions of private contractors and subcontractors against
out-of-state residents may be called to account under the Privileges and
Immunities Clause. A determination of whether a privilege is "fundamental" for
purposes of that Clause does not depend on whether the employees of private
contractors and subcontractors engaged in public works projects can or cannot
be said to be "working for the city." The opportunity to seek employment with
such private employers is "sufficiently basic to the livelihood of the
Nation," _Baldwin v. Montana Fish and Game Comm'n,_ 436 U.S. 371, 388, 98
S.Ct. 1852, 1863, 56 L.Ed.2d 354 (1978), as to fall within the purview of the
Privileges and Immunities Clause even though the contractors and
subcontractors are themselves engaged in projects funded in whole or part by
the city.

27

The conclusion that Camden's ordinance discriminates against a protected
privilege does not, of course, end the inquiry. We have stressed in prior
cases that "[l]ike many other constitutional provisions, the privileges and
immunities clause is not an absolute." _Toomer v. Witsell,_ 334 U.S. 385, 396,
68 S.Ct. 1156, 1162, 92 L.Ed. 1460 (1948). It does not preclude discrimination
against citizens of other States where there is a "substantial reason" for the
difference in treatment. "[T]he inquiry in each case must be concerned with
whether such reasons do exist and whether the degree of discrimination bears a
close relation to them." _Ibid._ As part of any justification offered for the
discriminatory law, nonresidents must somehow be shown to "constitute a
peculiar source of the evil at which the statute is aimed." _Id.,_ at 398, 68
S.Ct., at 1163.

28

The city of Camden contends that its ordinance is necessary to counteract
grave economic and social ills. Spiralling unemployment, a sharp decline in
population, and a dramatic reduction in the number of businesses located in
the city have eroded property values and depleted the city's tax base. The
resident hiring preference is designed, the city contends, to increase the
number of employed persons living in Camden and to arrest the "middle class
flight" currently plaguing the city. The city also argues that all nonCamden
residents employed on city public works projects, whether they reside in New
Jersey or Pennsylvania, constitute a "source of the evil at which the statute
is aimed." That is, they "live off" Camden without "living in" Camden. Camden
contends that the scope of the discrimination practiced in the ordinance, with
its municipal residency requirement, is carefully tailored to alleviate this
evil without unreasonably harming nonresidents, who still have access to 60%
of the available positions.

29

Every inquiry under the Privileges and Immunities Clause "must . . . be
conducted with due regard for the principle that the states should have
considerable leeway in analyzing local evils and in prescribing appropriate
cures." _Toomer v. Witsell,_ 334 U.S. 385, 396, 68 S.Ct. 1156, 1162, 92 L.Ed.
1460 (1948). This caution is particularly appropriate when a government body
is merely setting conditions on the expenditure of funds it controls. See
_supra,_ at 221. The Alaska Hire statute at issue in _Hicklin v. Orbeck,_ 437
U.S. 518, 98 S.Ct. 2482, 57 L.Ed.2d 397 (1978), swept within its strictures
not only contractors and subcontractors dealing directly with the State's oil
and gas; it also covered suppliers who provided goods and services to those
contractors and subcontractors. We invalidated the Act as "an attempt to force
virtually all businesses that benefit in some way from the economic ripple
effect of Alaska's decision to develop its oil and gas resources to bias their
employment practices in favor of the State's residents." _Id.,_ at 531, 98
S.Ct., at 2490. No similar "ripple effect" appears to infect the Camden
ordinance. It is limited in scope to employees working directly on city public
works projects.

30

Nonetheless, we find it impossible to evaluate Camden's justification on the
record as it now stands. No trial has ever been held in the case. No findings
of fact have been made. The Supreme Court of New Jersey certified the case for
direct appeal after the brief administrative proceedings that led to approval
of the ordinance by the State Treasurer. It would not be appropriate for this
Court either to make factual determinations as an initial matter or to take
judicial notice of Camden's decay. We, therefore, deem it wise to remand the
case to the New Jersey Supreme Court. That court may decide, consistent with
state procedures, on the best method for making the necessary findings.

31

The judgment of the Supreme Court of New Jersey is reversed, and the case is
remanded for proceedings not inconsistent with this opinion.

32

_Reversed and Remanded._

33

Justice BLACKMUN, dissenting.

34

For over a century the underlying meaning of the Privileges and Immunities
Clause of the Constitution's Article IV1 has been regarded as settled: at
least absent some substantial, noninvidious justification, a State may not
discriminate between its own residents and residents of other States on the
basis of state citizenship.2 See generally _Hicklin v. Orbeck,_ 437 U.S. 518,
523-526, 98 S.Ct. 2482, 2486-2488, 57 L.Ed.2d 397 (1978); _Toomer v. Witsell,_
334 U.S. 385, 395, 68 S.Ct. 1156, 1162, 92 L.Ed. 1460 (1948); _Hague v. CIO,_
307 U.S. 496, 511, 59 S.Ct. 954, 962, 83 L.Ed. 1423 (1939) (opinion of
Roberts, J.); _Slaughter-House Cases,_ 16 Wall. 36, 77, 21 L.Ed. 394 (1873);
_Paul v. Virginia,_ 8 Wall. 168, 180, 19 L.Ed. 357 (1869).

35

Today, however, the Court casually extends the scope of the Clause by holding
that it applies to laws that discriminate _among_ state residents on the basis
of _municipal_ residence, simply because discrimination on the basis of
municipal residence disadvantages citizens of other States " _ipso facto._ "
_Ante,_ at 216-217. This novel interpretation arrives accompanied by little
practical justification and no historical or textual support whatsoever.
Because I believe that the Privileges and Immunities Clause was not intended
to apply to the kind of municipal discrimination presented by this case, I
would affirm the judgment of the Supreme Court of New Jersey.3

36

* The historical underpinnings of the Privileges and Immunities Clause are not in serious dispute. The Clause was derived from the fourth Article of Confederation4 and was designed to carry forward that provision's prescription of interstate comity. _Austin v. New Hampshire,_ 420 U.S. 656, 660-661, 95 S.Ct. 1191, 1194-1195, 43 L.Ed.2d 530 (1975); _United States v. Wheeler,_ 254 U.S. 281, 294, 41 S.Ct. 133, 134, 65 L.Ed. 270 (1920); _Slaughter-House Cases,_ 16 Wall., at 75. Both the text of the Clause and the historical record confirm that the Framers meant to foreclose any one State from denying citizens of other States the same "privileges and immunities" accorded its own citizens. See _Austin v. New Hampshire,_ 420 U.S., at 660-661, 95 S.Ct., at 1194-1195. James Madison complained during the Constitutional Convention of "Acts of Virga. & Maryland which give a preference to their own citizens in cases where the Citizens [of other states] are entitled to equality of privileges by the Articles of Confederation."5 Alexander Hamilton, who deemed the Privileges and Immunities Clause "the basis of the Union," The Federalist No. 80, p. 502 (B. Wright ed. 1961), expressly linked the Clause with the concern over state parochialism that gave rise to the federal courts' diversity jurisdiction under Article III:

37

"[I]n order to [ensure] the inviolable maintenance of that equality of
privileges and immunities to which the citizens of the Union will be entitled,
the national judiciary ought to preside in all cases in which one State or its
citizens are opposed to another State or its citizens. To secure the full
effect of so fundamental a provision against all evasion and subterfuge, it is
necessary that its construction should be committed to that tribunal which,
having no local attachments, will be likely to be impartial between the
different States and their citizens. . . ." _Ibid._

38

While the Framers thus conceived of the Privileges and Immunities Clause as an
instrument for frustrating discrimination based on state citizenship, there is
no evidence of any sort that they were concerned by intrastate discrimination
based on municipal residence. The most obvious reason for this is also the
most simple one: by the time the Constitution was enacted, such discrimination
was rarely practiced and even more rarely successful.6 Even had attempts to
practice the kind of economic localism at issue here been more widespread,
moreover, there is little reason to believe that the Framers would have
devoted their limited institutional resources to bringing such conduct within
the ambit of the Privileges and Immunities Clause. Whatever the weaknesses of
the new state governments in suppressing sectional conflicts that gave rise to
outright physical violence, like Shays' Rebellion in 1786-1787, the States had
more than adequate powers to prevent localities from disrupting the States'
internal economic affairs through discriminatory ordinances and regulations.
By the time the Constitution was adopted, most state legislatures had assumed
the power to grant and alter municipal charters and the power to legislate
with respect to municipal affairs.7 Even before the Revolution, the colonial
legislatures had shown themselves willing and able to exercise this authority
to override local protectionist ordinances. In 1746, for example, the New York
Assembly dismantled a cartel of New York City lawyers by requiring the city to
open its Mayor's Court to qualified lawyers from throughout the colony.8 As a
result, the Framers had every reason to believe that intrastate discrimination
based on municipal residence could and would be dealt with by the States
themselves in those instances where it persisted.9

39

In light of the historical context in which the Privileges and Immunities
Clause was adopted, it hardly is surprising that none of this Court's
intervening decisions has suggested that the Clause applies to discrimination
on the basis of municipal residence. To the contrary, while the Court never
has addressed the question directly,10 it repeatedly has proceeded on the
assumption that the "Privileges and Immunities of Citizens" to which the
Clause refers are entitlements held equally by all citizens of a State. Thus,
in Paul v. Virginia, _supra,_ the Court stated that the Clause safeguards the
enjoyment of "those privileges and immunities which are common to the citizens
[in a State] under their constitution and laws by virtue of their being
citizens." 8 Wall., at 180. In _Blake v. McClung,_ 172 U.S. 239, 19 S.Ct. 165,
43 L.Ed. 432 (1898), the Court condemned a Tennessee statute that granted a
priority to resident creditors over nonresident creditors on the assumption
that the State's rules governing debtor-creditor relations "will be applied by
its courts in all appropriate cases between citizens of that State, without
making any distinction _between them._ " _Id.,_ at 254, 19 S.Ct., at 171
(emphasis in original). In _Travellers' Insurance Co. v. Connecticut,_ 185
U.S. 364, 22 S.Ct. 673, 46 L.Ed. 949 (1902), the Court rejected a Privileges
and Immunities Clause challenge to a Connecticut statute that taxed
nonresident stockholders at a nominally higher rate than resident
stockholders, on the ground that the direct differential was roughly offset by
municipal taxes paid only by residents. The Court recognized that the burden
borne by nonresidents might exceed that borne by residents in a particular
year, but pointed out that "a like inequality will exist between residents of
different localities in the State by reason of the different rates of taxation
in those localities"; the disparate burden was permissible under these
circumstances because "[y]ou cannot put _one_ resident against _one_ non-
resident stockholder and by a comparison of their different burdens determine
the validity of the legislation any more than you can place a stockholder
resident in one municipality over against a stockholder resident in another
municipality, and by comparison of their different burdens determine the
validity of the tax law in respect to resident stockholders." _Id.,_ at 369,
22 S.Ct., at 675 (emphasis added). In each case, the underlying assumption has
been that the constitutionality _vel non_ of a particular statute under the
Privileges and Immunities Clause turns on whether the statute deprives
nonresidents of benefits enjoyed in common by state residents by virtue of
their residence _simpliciter._

40

Indeed, I had understood the Court to have reaffirmed this principle only two
Terms ago in _Zobel v. Williams,_ 457 U.S. 55, 102 S.Ct. 2309, 72 L.Ed.2d 672
(1982). In _Zobel,_ the Court held that an Alaska statute which allocated
state treasury refunds to state residents on the basis of the length of their
residence violated the Equal Protection Clause. The Court declined, however,
to hold that the statute violated the Privileges and Immunities Clause. It
observed that the statute "does not simply make distinctions between native-
born Alaskans and those who migrate to Alaska from other States;" instead, it
"also discriminates among long-time residents and even native-born residents."
457 U.S., at 59, n. 5, 102 S.Ct., at 2312, n. 5. As a result:

41

"The statute does not involve the kind of discrimination which the Privileges
and Immunities Clause of Art. IV was designed to prevent. That Clause 'was
designed to insure to a citizen of State A who ventures into State B the same
privileges which the citizens of State B enjoy.' _Toomer v. Witsell,_ 334 U.S.
385, 395 [68 S.Ct. 1156, 1162, 92 L.Ed. 1460] (1948). The Clause is thus not
applicable to this case." _Id.,_ at 60, n. 5, 102 S.Ct., at 2312, n. 5.

42

I am somewhat at a loss to understand how the Court's decision today can be
reconciled with its reasoning in _Zobel._11 The Alaska statute at issue in
_Zobel_ fell outside the scope of the Privileges and Immunities Clause for the
elementary reason that it did not discriminate between state residents and
nonresidents on the basis of state residence; rather, it discriminated _among_
state residents in a way that disadvantaged nonresidents as well but did not
thereby implicate the underlying concerns of the Privileges and Immunities
Clause. The Camden ordinance presently before the Court occupies precisely the
same position.

43

The Court's decision clashes with other Privileges and Immunities Clause
precedents as well. The Court recognizes, as it must, that the Privileges and
Immunities Clause does not afford state residents any protection against their
own State's laws. See, _e.g., Bradwell v. Illinois,_ 16 Wall. 130, 138, 21
L.Ed. 442 (1873); _Slaughter-House Cases,_ 16 Wall., at 77. When this settled
rule is combined with the Court's newly-fashioned rule concerning municipal
discrimination, however, it has the perverse effect of vesting non-New Jersey
residents with constitutional privileges that are not enjoyed by most New
Jersey residents themselves. This result is directly contrary to the Court's
longstanding position that the Privileges and Immunities Clause does not give
nonresidents "higher and greater privileges than are enjoyed by the citizens
of the state itself." _Bank of Augusta v. Earle,_ 13 Pet. 519, 586, 10 L.Ed.
274 (1839); accord, _Shaffer v. Carter,_ 252 U.S. 37, 53, 40 S.Ct. 221, 226,
64 L.Ed. 445 (1920); _Detroit v. Osborne,_ 135 U.S. 492, 498, 10 S.Ct. 1012,
1013, 34 L.Ed. 260 (1890). When judicial alchemy transmutes gold into lead in
this fashion, it is time for the Court to re-examine its reasoning.

44

Finally, the Court fails to attend to the functional considerations that
underlie the Privileges and Immunities Clause. The Clause has been a necessary
limitation on state autonomy not simply because of the self-interest of
individual States, but because state parochialism is likely to go unchecked by
state political processes when those who are disadvantaged are by definition
disenfranchised as well. The Clause remedies this breakdown in the
representative process by requiring state residents to bear the same burdens
that they choose to place on nonresidents; "by constitutionally tying the fate
of outsiders to the fate of those possessing political power, the framers
insured that their interests would be well looked after." J. Ely, Democracy
and Distrust 83 (1980). As a practical matter, therefore, the scope of the
Clause may be measured by asking whether failure to link the interests of
those who are disadvantaged with the interests of those who are preferred will
consign the former group to "the uncertain remedies afforded by diplomatic
processes and official retaliation." _Toomer v. Witsell,_ 334 U.S., at 395, 68
S.Ct., at 1162; see _Austin v. New Hampshire,_ 420 U.S., at 662, 95 S.Ct., at
1195.

45

Contrary to the Court's tacit assumption, discrimination on the basis of
municipal residence is substantially different in this regard from
discrimination on the basis of state citizenship. The distinction is simple
but fundamental: discrimination on the basis of municipal residence penalizes
persons within the State's political community as well as those without. The
Court itself points out that while New Jersey citizens who reside outside
Camden are not protected by the Privileges and Immunities Clause, they may
resort to the State's political processes to protect themselves. _Ante,_ at
217. What the Court fails to appreciate is that this avenue of relief for New
Jersey residents works to protect residents of other States as well;
disadvantaged state residents who turn to the state legislature to displace
ordinances like Camden's further the interests of nonresidents as well as
their own.12 Nor is this mechanism for relief merely a theoretical one; in the
past decade several States, including California and Georgia, have repealed or
forbidden protectionist ordinances like the one at issue here.13 In short,
discrimination on the basis of municipal residence simply does not consign
residents of other States, in the words of _Toomer, supra,_ to "the uncertain
remedies afforded by diplomatic processes and official retaliation." The Court
thus has applied the Privileges and Immunities Clause without regard for the
political ills that it was designed to cure.14

46

It still might be possible to redeem the Court's decision if it were compelled
by the language of the Privileges and Immunities Clause. The Court itself,
however, concedes that its interpretation of the Clause does not attach
readily to a constitutional provision phrased solely in terms of state
citizenship. _Ante,_ at 1026. The Court seeks to defend its excursion beyond
the frontiers of the constitutional language on the ground that it never has
read the Privileges and Immunities Clause literally to apply only to
classifications based on state citizenship. _Ibid._ The examples it cites,
however, are hardly compelling support. _Mullaney v. Anderson,_ 342 U.S. 415,
72 S.Ct. 428, 96 L.Ed. 458 (1952), held not that the Privileges and Immunities
Clause applies _ex proprio vigore_ to discrimination by a territorial
legislature based on territorial residence, but rather that Congress had made
the Privileges and Immunities Clause applicable to the Territory of Alaska by
statute. See 342 U.S., at 419-420, 72 S.Ct., at 431-432.15 See also Haavik v.
Alaska Packers _Assn.,_ 263 U.S. 510, 515, 44 S.Ct. 177, 178, 68 L.Ed. 414
(1924). Even if _Mullaney v. Anderson_ set forth the proposition for which it
is cited, moreover, the practical similarity between discrimination based on
territorial residence and discrimination based on state residence has no
parallel here. Similarly, while the Court unquestionably has come to treat the
terms "citizen" and "resident" in this area as "essentially interchangeable,"
_Austin v. New Hampshire,_ 420 U.S., at 662, n. 8, 95 S.Ct., at 1195, n. 8, it
has done so not out of a general disregard for the Constitution's language,
but rather because the practical relationship between residence and
citizenship is close enough that discrimination on the basis of the one
criterion effectively amounts to discrimination based on the other. Cf.
_Travis v. Yale & Towne Mfg. Co.,_ 252 U.S. 60, 79, 40 S.Ct. 228, 231, 64
L.Ed. 460 (1920); Currie & Schreter, Unconstitutional Discrimination in the
Conflict of Laws: Privileges and Immunities, 69 Yale L.J. 1323, 1344 (1960).
These decisions are not, therefore, license for the Court to set aside the
language of the Privileges and Immunities Clause as an inconvenient obstacle
to a preferred result. Whenever this Court has departed from the literal
language of the Clause in the past, it has remained faithful to the underlying
purposes of the Clause. For the reasons already set forth, I believe that the
Court's decision today does not satisfy that requirement.

II

47

Needless to say, my view of the constitutional question in this case does not
depend on my personal opinion about the desirability of the course on which
Camden has embarked. I do not find "beggar thy neighbor" economic policies any
more attractive when practiced by municipalities than when practiced by States
or nations. The unedifying sight of localities fighting for parochial gain at
one another's expense gives new urgency to Benjamin Franklin's reputed warning
that "we must . . . all hang together, or most assuredly we shall all hang
separately." R. Clark, Benjamin Franklin 286 (1983). At the risk of restating
the obvious, however, the issue before us is not the desirability of the
ordinance but its constitutionality--more particularly, its constitutionality
under the Privileges and Immunities Clause.16 Because I believe that the
Clause does not apply to discrimination based on municipal residence, I
dissent.

1

"The citizens of each State shall be entitled to all the Privileges and
Immunities of Citizens in the several States." United States Constitution,
Art. IV, ยง 2, cl. 1.

2

The New Jersey Law Against Discrimination establishes a comprehensive
affirmative action program in the awarding of public works contracts. New
Jersey Statutes Annotated (N.J.S.A.) 10:5-31 to 38. Any contractor,
subcontractor or firm seeking such contracts must guarantee compliance with an
affirmative action program approved by the State Treasurer. The Treasurer is
empowered to promulgate specific affirmative action requirements based on "the
percentage of population of minority groups in the State or areas thereof."
N.J.S.A. 10:5-36(a). Alternatively, the law permits municipal and state
agencies to adopt and administer their own affirmative action plans. N.J.S.A.
10:5-36(c). Such plans must be submitted to the State Treasurer to ensure that
each plan conforms to the statutory and administrative requirements, and
"establishes an employment goal which is not lower than the applicable goal
established by" the Treasurer. New Jersey Administrative Code 17:27-6.5.

3

The specific scope of the ordinance was stated as follows:

"Wherever the City of Camden spends funds derived from any public source for
construction contracts or where the City of Camden confers a direct financial
benefit upon a party, but excluding the grant of a property tax abatement, the
fair market value of which exceeds $50,000.00, the provisions of this
ordinance shall apply. . . . The provisions of this ordinance shall also apply
to the development and construction of all residential housing of four (4)
units or less." Ordinance MC 1650 ยง II, Pet., at A38-A39. Appellant argued
initially that the final sentence of this section extended the reach of the
city's ordinance to purely private construction in which municipal funds were
not involved. Appellees claimed that the ordinance was never so interpreted
and has only been applied to projects funded in whole or in part by city funds
or funds administered by the city. In light of subsequent amendments, see
_infra,_ at 213-214, the scope of the ordinance is no longer in issue.

4

The Council has at least some members who reside outside New Jersey.

5

The Council also challenged approval of the minority hiring goals as _ultra
vires_ the State Treasurer's authority and as a violation of equal protection.
The New Jersey court rejected both arguments, finding approval of the goal
within the clear scope of the State Treasurer's delegated authority and the
goal itself constitutional under _Fullilove v. Klutznick,_ 448 U.S. 448, 100
S.Ct. 2758, 65 L.Ed.2d 902 (1980). 88 N.J., at 326-328, 330-337, 443 A.2d 148.
The Council has not appealed from that ruling.

6

See n. 3, _supra._

7

In _White,_ 103 S.Ct., at 1048, n. 12, we specifically declined to pass on the
merits of a privileges and immunities challenge to the mayor's executive order
because the court below did not reach the issue.

8

As noted by the Supreme Court of New Jersey, this case was brought as a
challenge to the State's administrative approval of the Camden ordinance, and
not as a direct challenge to Camden's adoption of it. 88 N.J., at 324, 443
A.2d 148.

9

The dissent suggests that New Jersey citizens not residing in Camden will
adequately protect the interests of out-of-state residents and that the scope
of the Privileges and Immunities Clause should be measured in light of this
political reality. See, _post,_ at 231-232; _post,_ at 227 ("the Framers had
every reason to believe that intrastate discrimination based on municipal
residence could and would be dealt with by the States themselves in those
instances where it persisted"). What the dissent fails to appreciate is that
the Camden ordinance at issue in this case was adopted pursuant to a
comprehensive, state-wide program applicable in all New Jersey cities. See n.
2, _supra._ The Camden resident-preference ordinance has already received
state sanction and approval, see p. 212, _supra,_ and every New Jersey city is
free to adopt a similar protectionist measure. Some have already done so. See
Appellant's Reply Brief, at 41-42, n. 30, and Appendix A. Thus, it is hard to
see how New Jersey residents living outside Camden will protect the interests
of out-of-state citizens.

More fundamentally, the dissent's proposed blanket exemption for all
classifications that are less than state-wide would provide States with a
simple means for evading the strictures of the Privileges and Immunities
Clause. Suppose, for example, that California wanted to guarantee that all
employees of contractors and subcontractors working on construction projects
funded in whole or in part by state funds are state residents. Under the
dissent's analysis, the California legislature need merely divide the State in
half, providing one resident-hiring preference for Northern Californians on
all such projects taking place in Northern California, and one for Southern
Californians on all projects taking place in Southern California. State
residents generally would benefit from the law at the expense of out-of-state
residents; yet, the law would be immune from scrutiny under the Clause simply
because it was not phrased in terms of _state_ citizenship or residency. Such
a formalistic construction would effectively write the Clause out of the
Constitution.

10

Under the dissent's formalistic approach, see n. 9, _supra,_ the "Alaska Hire"
statute in _Hicklin_ would have been exempt from any challenge under the
Privileges and Immunities Clause if the Alaska legislature had simply excluded
from the hiring preference the residents of one remote county. Yet the
discriminatory effect on out-of-state residents, with which, after all, the
Clause is concerned, would have been the same.

1

"The Citizens of each State shall be entitled to all Privileges and Immunities
of Citizens in the several States." U.S. Const., Art. IV, ยง 2, cl. 1.

2

As the Court points out, it has come to treat the terms "citizen" and
"resident" interchangeably for purposes of Privileges and Immunities Clause
analysis. _Ante,_ at 216. For the sake of simplicity I shall do the same,
except where the context requires a distinction to be drawn.

3

I agree with the Court that the Camden ordinance is not insulated from
scrutiny under the Privileges and Immunities Clause merely because it is a
municipal ordinance rather than a state statute. _Ante,_ at 214-215. See
_Woodruff v. Parham,_ 8 Wall. 123, 140, 19 L.Ed. 382 (1869) (dictum). I also
agree that appellant's equal protection challenge to the ordinance's
durational requirement has been mooted by the deletion of that provision in
1983. _Ante,_ at 213. See _Hall v. Beals,_ 396 U.S. 45, 48, 90 S.Ct. 200, 201,
24 L.Ed.2d 214 (1969).

4

"The better to secure and perpetuate mutual friendship and intercourse among
the people of the different States in this Union, the free inhabitants of each
of these States, paupers, vagabonds and fugitives from justice excepted, shall
be entitled to all privileges and immunities of free citizens in the several
States; and the people of each State shall have free ingress and regress to
and from any other State, and shall enjoy therein all the privileges of trade
and commerce, subject to the same duties, impositions and restrictions as the
inhabitants thereof respectively. . . ." Articles of Confederation, Art. IV
(1777), as printed in Documents Illustrative of the Formation of the Union of
the American States 28 (1927).

5

1 Records of the Federal Convention of 1787, p. 317 (footnote omitted) (M.
Farrand ed. 1911).

6

See, _e.g.,_ E. Griffith, History of American City Government: The Colonial
Period 132-143 (1972 ed.). The common trend in colonial cities in the two
generations before the Revolution was for pre-existing restrictions on trade
and craft work by "outsiders" to lapse into desuetude under the pressures of
increasing population mobility. See _id.,_ at 135, 141-143.

7

See McBain, The Legal Status of the American Colonial City, 40 Pol.Sci.Q. 177,
192-200 (1925).

8

E. Griffith, _supra,_ at 143, 341.

9

The idea that the Framers intended the Privileges and Immunities Clause to
reach discrimination based on municipal residence appears even more
implausible if one assumes that the Framers literally meant to confine the
Clause's protections to "Privileges and Immunities of _Citizens._ " If the
purpose of the Clause were simply to relieve citizens of other States "from
the disabilities of alienage" and guarantee them "the advantages resulting
from citizenship," _Paul v. Virginia,_ 8 Wall. 168, 180, 19 L.Ed. 357 (1869),
the Clause necessarily would not be implicated by an ordinance like Camden's;
the benefits created by such an ordinance are not an incident of state
citizenship, even for residents of the municipality itself.

10

The Court had a remarkably similar New Orleans ordinance before it in
_Chadwick v. Kelley,_ 187 U.S. 540, 23 S.Ct. 175, 47 L.Ed. 293 (1903), but
declined to reach the Privileges and Immunities Clause question because the
party challenging the ordinance was himself a resident of New Orleans. _Id.,_
at 546, 23 S.Ct., at 177. See also _Gallup v. Schmidt,_ 183 U.S. 300, 22 S.Ct.
162, 46 L.Ed. 207 (1902); _Downham v. Alexandria Council,_ 10 Wall. 173, 19
L.Ed. 929 (1870). Few decisions by state and federal courts have considered
the question. See, _e.g., Ward Baking Co. v. Fernandina,_ 29 F.2d 789 (SD
Fla.1928); _Mount Pleasant v. Clutch,_ 6 Iowa 546 (1858); _In re Jarvis,_ 66
Kan. 329, 71 P. 576 (1903); _Fecheimer Bros. & Co. v. Louisville,_ 84 Ky. 306,
2 S.W. 65 (1886); _State ex rel. Greenwood v. Nolan,_ 108 Minn. 170, 122 N.W.
255 (1909); _Rothermel v. Meyerle,_ 136 Pa. 250, 20 A. 583 (1890). Academic
commentary on the question is limited. See R. Howell, The Privileges and
Immunities of State Citizenship 45-47 (1918); Eule, Laying the Dormant
Commerce Clause to Rest, 91 Yale L.J. 425, 449, n. 128 (1982); Meyers, The
Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the Several States, pt. 2, 1
Mich.L.Rev. 364, 383 (1903).

11

Justice O'CONNOR, who concurred in the judgment in _Zobel,_ wrote separately
to express the contrary view that the Privileges and Immunities Clause applied
to the Alaska statute even though the statute arguably "discriminates among
classes of residents, rather than between residents and nonresidents." 457
U.S., at 75, 102 S.Ct., at 2320. The Court's apparent reliance on Justice
O'CONNOR's concurrence, see _ante,_ at 217-218, and its failure to note the
position of the Court in _Zobel_ are one measure of the inconsistency between
today's decision and _Zobel._ Even Justice O'CONNOR's reasoning, however, does
not support the result the Court reaches today. For Justice O'CONNOR, the
critical effect of the Alaska statute was that "[e]ach group of citizens who
migrated to Alaska in the past, or chooses to move there in the future, lives
in the State on less favorable terms than those who arrived earlier"; a
nonresident who moved to Alaska "labors under a continuous disability" because
of his prior residence in another State. 457 U.S., at 75, 102 S.Ct., at 2321.
Here, in contrast, the Camden ordinance imposes no "continuous disability" on
anyone who takes up residence in the city.

12

The Court suggests that reliance on the state political process is misplaced
because the Camden ordinance itself "was adopted pursuant to a state-wide
program applicable in all New Jersey cities" and has received "state sanction
and approval." _Ante,_ at 217, n. 9. The Court misrepresents the nature of
both the statewide program and the "sanction and approval" given the Camden
ordinance. The ordinance was enacted pursuant to a state statute designed
solely to further equal opportunity and affirmative action in New Jersey
public works contracting; the New Jersey Supreme Court itself accepted
appellees' argument that the state statute "does not contemplate any residency
requirement." 88 N.J. 317, 328, 443 A.2d 148, 153 (1982). In turn, the
ordinance was approved by a state agency whose sole mandate was to ensure that
the ordinance was not inconsistent with the minimum affirmative action
requirements of the state statute. _Id.,_ at 329, 443 A.2d, at 154. The
municipal residency requirement thus has neither been embraced by the state
legislature nor approved by any state agency with the authority to reject the
ordinance on the basis of the residency requirement alone. Under these
circumstances, the Court's observation reduces to the pedestrian point that
the Camden ordinance has been adopted by the city and has yet to be displaced
by the state legislature. That fact says nothing at all about the likelihood
that the ordinance will be repealed in the future, of course, particularly
should it develop on remand that interested parties like appellant ultimately
must seek political rather than judicial vindication.

13

See Eisinger, Municipal Residency Requirements and the Local Economy, 64
Soc.Sci.Q. 85, 87 (1983); Note, The Constitutionality of Residency
Requirements for Municipal Employees, 24 Emory L.J. 446, 448, n. 7 (1975);
Note, Municipal Employee Residency Requirements and Equal Protection, 84 Yale
L.J. 1684, n. 3 (1975).

14

Rather than respond directly to these considerations, the Court finds it
easier to take issue with what it characterizes as "the dissent's proposed
blanket exemption" from the Privileges and Immunities Clause "for all
classifications that are less than state-wide." _Ante,_ at 217, n. 9. The
Court's refusal to accept such an exemption is understandable; what is curious
is why the Court attributes the exemption to this dissent. As I indicate
below, I am no less prepared than the Court has been in the past to apply the
Privileges and Immunities Clause when the classification at issue is
practically equivalent to those explicitly identified by the Clause. If the
Alaska legislature were to try to rehabilitate the "Alaska Hire" statute
invalidated in _Hicklin v. Orbeck,_ 437 U.S. 518, 98 S.Ct. 2482, 57 L.Ed.2d
397 (1978), by excluding "the residents of one remote county" from the hiring
preference, _ante,_ at 220, n. 10, for example, the classification would come
within the ambit of the Clause because it would bear the same sort of
practical relationship to a classification based on state citizenship as do
classifications based on state residence. The Court fails to explain why a
classification that benefits all state residents _other_ than the residents of
a single locality stands in the same position, in terms of the practical
considerations underlying the Clause, as a classification that benefits _only_
the residents of one locality.

The Court raises the alternative prospect that a State might evade the
Privileges and Immunities Clause by dividing itself in half and granting the
residents in each half of the State employment preferences over residents in
the other half of the State. _Ante,_ at 217-218, n. 9. The Clause exists to
protect against those classifications that a State's political process cannot
be relied on to prevent, however, not those that it can, and there is no
reason to believe that state residents will be willing to forgo access to
employment in one half of a State merely to obtain privileged access to jobs
in the other half. The fact that no State has attempted anything resembling
the Court's proposed maneuver in the two centuries since the adoption of the
Clause, despite the fact that none of this Court's precedents has foreclosed
the option, strongly suggests that state political processes can be trusted to
prevent this kind of Balkanization. The Court cannot justify deforming the
Constitution's response to real problems by invoking imaginary and unrealistic
ones.

15

"Section 3 [of the Organic Act of Alaska] provides 'The Constitution of the
United States . . . shall have the same force and effect within the said
Territory as elsewhere in the United States.' 37 Stat. 512, 48 U.S.C. ยง 23\.
And ยง 9 extends the legislative power of the Territory to 'all rightful
subjects of legislation not inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the
United States, . . . .' 37 Stat. 512, 514, 48 U.S.C. ยง 77\. In the light of
these sections, we cannot presume that Congress authorized the Territorial
Legislature to treat citizens of States the way States cannot treat citizens
of sister States. . . . [T]he Territorial Legislature, particularly in the
regulation of fisheries, was granted no greater power over citizens of other
States than a State legislature has." 342 U.S., at 420, 72 S.Ct., at 431.

16

I argued without success last Term that, absent congressional authorization,
ordinances like Camden's violate the dormant Commerce Clause. _White v.
Massachusetts Council of Constr. Employers, Inc.,_ \--- U.S. ----, ----, 103
S.Ct. 1042, 1049, 75 L.Ed.2d 1 (1983) (opinion concurring in part and
dissenting in part). Although the Privileges and Immunities Clause and the
Commerce Clause embody closely related principles of interstate relations, I
agree with the Court that in certain circumstances the two Clauses "set
different standards for state conduct." _Ante,_ at 220. This is one such
circumstance; the Commerce Clause entails a substantive policy of unimpeded
interstate commerce that is impermissibly undermined by local protectionism
even when intrastate commerce is penalized as well. See _Dean Milk Co. v.
Madison,_ 340 U.S. 349, 354 and n. 4, 71 S.Ct. 295, 298 and n. 4, 95 L.Ed. 329
(1951).

