**127 S.Ct. 1786 (2007)**

# UNITED HAULERS ASSOCIATION, INC., et al., Petitioners,  
v.  
ONEIDA-HERKIMER SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY et al.

No. 05-1345.

**Supreme Court of United States.**

Argued January 8, 2007. Decided April 30, 2007.

*1790 Evan Tager, Washington, DC, for petitioners.

Michael J. Cahill, Holbrook, New York, for respondents.

Caitlin J. Halligan for New York as amicus curiae, by special leave of the
Court, supporting the respondents.

Evan M. Tager, Counsel of Record, Miriam R. Nemetz, Mayer, Brown, Rowe & Maw
LLP, Washington, DC, for Petitioners.

Michael J. Cahill, Counsel of Record, Germano & Cahill, PC, Holbrook, New
York, Judy Drabicki, Dexter, NY, Peter M. Rayhill, Kernan & Kernan P.C.,
Utica, NY, Bruce S. Rogow, Bruce S. Rogow, P.A., Fort Lauderdale, Florida, for
Oneida-Herkimer Solid Waste Management Authority, Richard A. Frye, Frye Foley
& Carbone, Utica, NY, for Oneida County NY, Thomas E. Kelly Horrigan,
Horrigan, Lombardo & Kelly PC, Amsterdam, NY, for Herkimer County, NY.

Chief Justice ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the Court, except as to Part
II-D.

"Flow control" ordinances require trash haulers to deliver solid waste to a
particular waste processing facility. In _C & A Carbone, Inc. v. Clarkstown,_
511 U.S. 383, 114 S.Ct. 1677, 128 L.Ed.2d 399 (1994), this Court struck down
under the Commerce Clause a flow control ordinance that forced haulers to
deliver waste to a particular _private_ processing facility. In this case, we
face flow control ordinances quite similar to the one invalidated in
_Carbone._ The only salient difference is that the laws at issue here require
haulers to bring waste to facilities owned and operated by a state-created
public benefit corporation. We find this difference constitutionally
significant. Disposing of trash has been a traditional government activity for
years, and laws that favor the government in such areasbut treat every
private business, whether in-state or out-of-state, exactly the samedo not
discriminate against interstate commerce for purposes of the Commerce Clause.
Applying the Commerce Clause test reserved for regulations that do not
discriminate against interstate commerce, we uphold these ordinances because
any incidental burden they may have on interstate commerce does not outweigh
the benefits they confer on the citizens of Oneida and Herkimer Counties.

## I

Located in central New York, Oneida and Herkimer Counties span over 2,600
square miles and are home to about 306,000 residents. Traditionally, each
city, town, or village within the Counties has been responsible for disposing
of its own waste. Many had relied on local landfills, some in a more
environmentally responsible fashion than others.

By the 1980's, the Counties confronted what they could credibly call a solid
waste "`crisis.'" Brief for Respondents 4. Many local landfills were operating
without permits and in violation of state regulations. Sixteen were ordered to
close and remediate the surrounding environment, costing *1791 the public tens
of millions of dollars. These environmental problems culminated in a federal
clean-up action against a landfill in Oneida County; the defendants in that
case named over 600 local businesses and several municipalities and school
districts as third-party defendants.

The "crisis" extended beyond health and safety concerns. The Counties had an
uneasy relationship with local waste management companies, enduring price
fixing, pervasive overcharging, and the influence of organized crime. Dramatic
price hikes were not uncommon: In 1986, for example, a county contractor
doubled its waste disposal rate on six weeks' notice.

Responding to these problems, the Counties requested and New York's
Legislature and Governor created the Oneida-Herkimer Solid Waste Management
Authority (Authority), a public benefit corporation. See N.Y. Pub. Auth. Law
Ann. § 2049-aa _et seq._ (West 1995). The Authority is empowered to collect,
process, and dispose of solid waste generated in the Counties. § 2049-ee(4).
To further the Authority's governmental and public purposes, the Counties may
impose "appropriate and reasonable limitations on competition" by, for
instance, adopting "local laws requiring that all solid waste ... be delivered
to a specified solid waste management-resource recovery facility." §
2049-tt(3).

In 1989, the Authority and the Counties entered into a Solid Waste Management
Agreement, under which the Authority agreed to manage all solid waste within
the Counties. Private haulers would remain free to pick up citizens' trash
from the curb, but the Authority would take over the job of processing the
trash, sorting it, and sending it off for disposal. To fulfill its part of the
bargain, the Authority agreed to purchase and develop facilities for the
processing and disposal of solid waste and recyclables generated in the
Counties.

The Authority collected "tipping fees" to cover its operating and maintenance
costs for these facilities.[1] The tipping fees significantly exceeded those
charged for waste removal on the open market, but they allowed the Authority
to do more than the average private waste disposer. In addition to landfill
transportation and solid waste disposal, the fees enabled the Authority to
provide recycling of 33 kinds of materials, as well as composting, household
hazardous waste disposal, and a number of other services. If the Authority's
operating costs and debt service were not recouped through tipping fees and
other charges, the agreement provided that the Counties would make up the
difference.

As described, the agreement had a flaw: Citizens might opt to have their waste
hauled to facilities with lower tipping fees. To avoid being stuck with the
bill for facilities that citizens voted for but then chose not to use, the
Counties enacted "flow control" ordinances requiring that all solid waste
generated within the Counties be delivered to the Authority's processing
sites.[2] Private haulers must obtain a permit *1792 from the Authority to
collect waste in the Counties. Penalties for noncompliance with the ordinances
include permit revocation, fines, and imprisonment.

Petitioners are United Haulers Association, Inc., a trade association made up
of solid waste management companies, and six haulers that operated in Oneida
and Herkimer Counties when this action was filed. In 1995, they sued the
Counties and the Authority under Rev. Stat. § 1979, 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging
that the flow control laws violate the Commerce Clause by discriminating
against interstate commerce. They submitted evidence that without the flow
control laws and the associated $86-per-ton tipping fees, they could dispose
of solid waste at out-of-state facilities for between $37 and $55 per ton,
including transportation.

The District Court read our decision in _Carbone,_ 511 U.S. 383, 114 S.Ct.
1677, 128 L.Ed.2d 399, as categorically rejecting nearly all flow control
laws. The court ruled in the haulers' favor, enjoining enforcement of the
Counties' laws. The Second Circuit reversed, reasoning that _Carbone_ and our
other dormant Commerce Clause precedents allow for a distinction between laws
that benefit public as opposed to private facilities. 261 F.3d 245, 263 (C.A.2
2001). Accordingly, it held that a statute does not discriminate against
interstate commerce when it favors local government at the expense of all
private industry. The court remanded to let the District Court decide whether
the Counties' ordinances nevertheless placed an incidental burden on
interstate commerce, and if so, whether the ordinances' benefits outweighed
that burden.

On remand and after protracted discovery, a Magistrate Judge and the District
Court found that the haulers did not show that the ordinances imposed _any_
cognizable burden on interstate commerce. The Second Circuit affirmed,
assuming that the laws exacted some toll on interstate commerce, but finding
any possible burden "modest" compared to the "clear and substantial" benefits
of the ordinances. 438 F.3d 150, 160 (2006). Because the Sixth Circuit had
recently issued a conflicting decision holding that a flow control ordinance
favoring a public entity _does_ facially discriminate against interstate
commerce, see _National Solid Wastes Management Assn. v. Daviess Cty.,_ 434
F.3d 898 (2006), we granted certiorari, 548 U.S. ___, 127 S.Ct. 35, 165
L.Ed.2d 1013 (2006).

## II

## A

The Commerce Clause provides that "Congress shall have Power . . . [t]o
regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States." U.S.
Const., Art. I, § 8, cl. 3. Although the Constitution does not in terms limit
the power of States to regulate commerce, we have long interpreted the
Commerce Clause as an implicit restraint on state authority, even in the
absence of a conflicting federal statute. See _Case of the State Freight Tax,_
15 Wall. 232, 279, 21 L.Ed. *1793 146 (1873); _Cooley v. Board of Wardens of
Port of Philadelphia ex rel. Soc. for Relief of Distressed Pilots,_ 12 How.
299, 318, 13 L.Ed. 996 (1852).

To determine whether a law violates this so-called "dormant" aspect of the
Commerce Clause, we first ask whether it discriminates on its face against
interstate commerce. _American Trucking Assns., Inc. v. Michigan Pub. Serv.
Comm'n,_ 545 U.S. 429, 433, 125 S.Ct. 2419, 162 L.Ed.2d 407 (2005); _Fort
Gratiot Sanitary Landfill, Inc. v. Michigan Dept. of Natural Resources,_ 504
U.S. 353, 359, 112 S.Ct. 2019, 119 L.Ed.2d 139 (1992). In this context,
"`discrimination' simply means differential treatment of in-state and out-of-
state economic interests that benefits the former and burdens the latter."
_Oregon Waste Systems, Inc. v. Department of Environmental Quality of Ore.,_
511 U.S. 93, 99, 114 S.Ct. 1345, 128 L.Ed.2d 13 (1994); _New Energy Co. of
Ind. v. Limbach,_ 486 U.S. 269, 273, 108 S.Ct. 1803, 100 L.Ed.2d 302 (1988).
Discriminatory laws motivated by "simple economic protectionism" are subject
to a "virtually _per se_ rule of invalidity," _Philadelphia v. New Jersey,_
437 U.S. 617, 624, 98 S.Ct. 2531, 57 L.Ed.2d 475 (1978), which can only be
overcome by a showing that the State has no other means to advance a
legitimate local purpose, _Maine v. Taylor,_ 477 U.S. 131, 138, 106 S.Ct.
2440, 91 L.Ed.2d 110 (1986).

## B

Following the lead of the Sixth Circuit in _Daviess County,_ the haulers argue
vigorously that the Counties' ordinances discriminate against interstate
commerce under _Carbone._ In _Carbone,_ the town of Clarkstown, New York,
hired a private contractor to build a waste transfer station. According to the
terms of the deal, the contractor would operate the facility for five years,
charging an above-market tipping fee of $81 per ton; after five years, the
town would buy the facility for one dollar. The town guaranteed that the
facility would receive a certain volume of trash per year. To make good on its
promise, Clarkstown passed a flow control ordinance requiring that all
nonhazardous solid waste within the town be deposited at the transfer
facility. See 511 U.S., at 387, 114 S.Ct. 1677.

This Court struck down the ordinance, holding that it discriminated against
interstate commerce by "hoard[ing] solid waste, and the demand to get rid of
it, for the benefit of the preferred processing facility." _Id.,_ at 392, 114
S.Ct. 1677. The dissent pointed out that all of this Court's local processing
cases involved laws that discriminated in favor of _private_ entities, not
public ones. _Id.,_ at 411, 114 S.Ct. 1677 (opinion of SOUTER, J.). According
to the dissent, Clarkstown's ostensibly private transfer station was
"essentially a municipal facility," _id.,_ at 419, 114 S.Ct. 1677, and this
distinction should have saved Clarkstown's ordinance because favoring local
government is by its nature different from favoring a particular private
company. The majority did not comment on the dissent's public-private
distinction.

The parties in this case draw opposite inferences from the majority's silence.
The haulers say it proves that the majority agreed with the dissent's
characterization of the facility, but thought there was no difference under
the dormant Commerce Clause between laws favoring private entities and those
favoring public ones. The Counties disagree, arguing that the majority
studiously avoided the issue because the facility in _Carbone_ was private,
and therefore the question whether _public_ facilities may be favored was not
properly *1794 before the Court.[3]

We believe the latter interpretation of _Carbone_ is correct. As the Second
Circuit explained, "in _Carbone_ the Justices were divided over the _fact of
whether_ the favored facility was public or private, rather than on the import
of that distinction." 261 F.3d, at 259 (emphasis in original). The _Carbone_
dissent offered a number of reasons why public entities should be treated
differently from private ones under the dormant Commerce Clause. See 511 U.S.,
at 419-422, 114 S.Ct. 1677 (opinion of SOUTER, J.). It is hard to suppose that
the _Carbone_ majority definitively rejected these arguments without
explaining why.

The _Carbone_ majority viewed Clarkstown's flow control ordinance as "just one
more instance of local processing requirements that we long have held
invalid." _Id.,_ at 391, 114 S.Ct. 1677. It then cited six local processing
cases, every one of which involved discrimination in favor of _private_
enterprise.[4] The Court's own description of the cases acknowledges that the
"offending local laws hoard a local resourcebe it meat, shrimp, or milkfor
the benefit of _local businesses_ that treat it." _Id.,_ at 392, 114 S.Ct.
1677 (emphasis added). If the Court were extending this line of local
processing cases to cover discrimination in favor of local government, one
would expect it to have said so. Cf. _United States v. Burr,_ 25 F. Cas. 55,
165 (No. 14,693) (CC Va. 1807) (Marshall, C.J.) ("[A]n opinion which is to ...
establish a principle never before recognized, should be expressed in plain
and explicit terms").

The _Carbone_ majority stated that "[t]he _only conceivable distinction_ "
between the laws in the local processing cases and Clarkstown's flow control
ordinance was that Clarkstown's ordinance favored a single local business,
rather than a group of *1795 them. 511 U.S., at 392, 114 S.Ct. 1677 (emphasis
added). If the Court thought Clarkstown's processing facility was public, that
additional distinction was not merely "conceivable"it was conceived, and
discussed at length, by three Justices in dissent. _Carbone_ cannot be
regarded as having decided the public-private question.[5]

## C

The flow control ordinances in this case benefit a clearly public facility,
while treating all private companies exactly the same. Because the question is
now squarely presented on the facts of the case before us, we decide that such
flow control ordinances do not discriminate against interstate commerce for
purposes of the dormant Commerce Clause.

Compelling reasons justify treating these laws differently from laws favoring
particular private businesses over their competitors. "Conceptually, of
course, any notion of discrimination assumes a comparison of substantially
similar entities." _General Motors Corp. v. Tracy,_ 519 U.S. 278, 298, 117
S.Ct. 811, 136 L.Ed.2d 761 (1997) (footnote omitted). But States and
municipalities are not private businesses far from it. Unlike private
enterprise, government is vested with the responsibility of protecting the
health, safety, and welfare of its citizens. See _Metropolitan Life Ins. Co.
v. Massachusetts,_ 471 U.S. 724, 756, 105 S.Ct. 2380, 85 L.Ed.2d 728 (1985)
("The States traditionally have had great latitude under their police powers
to legislate as to the protection of the lives, limbs, health, comfort, and
quiet of all persons" (internal quotation marks omitted)). These important
responsibilities set state and local government apart from a typical private
business. Cf. _Tracy, supra,_ at 313, 117 S.Ct. 811 (SCALIA, J., concurring)
("Nothing in this Court's negative Commerce Clause jurisprudence" compels the
conclusion "that private marketers engaged in the sale of natural gas are
similarly situated to public utility companies").

Given these differences, it does not make sense to regard laws favoring local
government and laws favoring private industry with equal skepticism. As our
local processing cases demonstrate, when a law favors in-state business over
out-of-state competition, rigorous scrutiny is appropriate *1796 because the
law is often the product of "simple economic protectionism." _Wyoming v.
Oklahoma,_ 502 U.S. 437, 454, 112 S.Ct. 789, 117 L.Ed.2d 1 (1992);
_Philadelphia v. New Jersey,_ 437 U.S., at 626-627, 98 S.Ct. 2531. Laws
favoring local government, by contrast, may be directed toward any number of
legitimate goals unrelated to protectionism. Here the flow control ordinances
enable the Counties to pursue particular policies with respect to the handling
and treatment of waste generated in the Counties, while allocating the costs
of those policies on citizens and businesses according to the volume of waste
they generate.

The contrary approach of treating public and private entities the same under
the dormant Commerce Clause would lead to unprecedented and unbounded
interference by the courts with state and local government. The dormant
Commerce Clause is not a roving license for federal courts to decide what
activities are appropriate for state and local government to undertake, and
what activities must be the province of private market competition. In this
case, the citizens of Oneida and Herkimer Counties have chosen the government
to provide waste management services, with a limited role for the private
sector in arranging for transport of waste from the curb to the public
facilities. The citizens could have left the entire matter for the private
sector, in which case any regulation they undertook could not discriminate
against interstate commerce. But it was also open to them to vest
responsibility for the matter with their government, and to adopt flow control
ordinances to support the government effort. It is not the office of the
Commerce Clause to control the decision of the voters on whether government or
the private sector should provide waste management services. "The Commerce
Clause significantly limits the ability of States and localities to regulate
or otherwise burden the flow of interstate commerce, but it does not elevate
free trade above all other values." _Maine v. Taylor,_ 477 U.S., at 151, 106
S.Ct. 2440. See _Exxon Corp. v. Governor of Maryland,_ 437 U.S. 117, 127, 98
S.Ct. 2207, 57 L.Ed.2d 91 (1978) (Commerce Clause does not protect "the
particular structure or method of operation" of a market).

We should be particularly hesitant to interfere with the Counties' efforts
under the guise of the Commerce Clause because "[w]aste disposal is both
typically and traditionally a local government function." 261 F.3d, at 264
(case below) (Calabresi, J., concurring); see _USA Recycling, Inc. v. Town of
Babylon,_ 66 F.3d 1272, 1275 (C.A.2 1995) ("For ninety years, it has been
settled law that garbage collection and disposal is a core function of local
government in the United States"); M. Melosi, Garbage in the Cities: Refuse,
Reform, and the Environment, 1880-1980, pp. 153-155 (1981). Congress itself
has recognized local government's vital role in waste management, making clear
that "collection and disposal of solid wastes should continue to be primarily
the function of State, regional, and local agencies." Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act of 1976, 90 Stat. 2797, 42 U.S.C. § 6901(a)(4). The policy of
the State of New York favors "displac[ing] competition with regulation or
monopoly control" in this area. N.Y. Pub. Auth. Law Ann. § 2049-tt(3). We may
or may not agree with that approach, but nothing in the Commerce Clause vests
the responsibility for that policy judgment with the Federal Judiciary.[6]

*1797 Finally, it bears mentioning that the most palpable harm imposed by the ordinancesmore expensive trash removalis likely to fall upon the very people who voted for the laws. Our dormant Commerce Clause cases often find discrimination when a State shifts the costs of regulation to other States, because when "the burden of state regulation falls on interests outside the state, it is unlikely to be alleviated by the operation of those political restraints normally exerted when interests within the state are affected." _Southern Pacific Co. v. Arizona ex rel. Sullivan,_ 325 U.S. 761, 767-768, n. 2, 65 S.Ct. 1515, 89 L.Ed. 1915 (1945). Here, the citizens and businesses of the Counties bear the costs of the ordinances. There is no reason to step in and hand local businesses a victory they could not obtain through the political process.

We hold that the Counties' flow control ordinances, which treat in-state
private business interests exactly the same as out-of-state ones, do not
"discriminate against interstate commerce" for purposes of the dormant
Commerce Clause.[7]

## D

The Counties' flow control ordinances are properly analyzed under the test set
forth in _Pike v. Bruce Church, Inc.,_ 397 U.S. 137, 142, 90 S.Ct. 844, 25
L.Ed.2d 174 (1970), which is reserved for laws "directed to legitimate local
concerns, with effects upon interstate commerce that are only incidental."
_Philadelphia v. New Jersey,_ 437 U.S., at 624, 98 S.Ct. 2531. Under the
_Pike_ test, we will uphold a nondiscriminatory statute like this one "unless
the burden imposed on [interstate] commerce is clearly excessive in relation
to the putative local benefits." 397 U.S., at 142, 90 S.Ct. 844; _Northwest
Central Pipeline Corp. v. State Corporation Comm'n of Kan.,_ 489 U.S. 493,
525-526, 109 S.Ct. 1262, 103 L.Ed.2d 509 (1989).

After years of discovery, both the Magistrate Judge and the District Court
could not detect _any_ disparate impact on out-of-state as opposed to in-state
businesses. The Second Circuit alluded to, but did not endorse, a "rather
abstract harm" that may exist because "the Counties' flow control ordinances
have removed the waste generated in Oneida and Herkimer Counties from the
national marketplace for waste processing services." 438 F.3d, at 160. We find
it unnecessary to decide whether the ordinances impose any incidental burden
on interstate commerce because any arguable burden does not exceed the public
benefits of the ordinances.

*1798 The ordinances give the Counties a convenient and effective way to finance their integrated package of waste-disposal services. While "revenue generation is not a local interest that can justify _discrimination_ against interstate commerce," _Carbone,_ 511 U.S., at 393, 114 S.Ct. 1677 (emphasis added), we think it is a cognizable benefit for purposes of the _Pike_ test.

At the same time, the ordinances are more than financing tools. They increase
recycling in at least two ways, conferring significant health and
environmental benefits upon the citizens of the Counties. First, they create
enhanced incentives for recycling and proper disposal of other kinds of waste.
Solid waste disposal is expensive in Oneida-Herkimer, but the Counties accept
recyclables and many forms of hazardous waste for free, effectively
encouraging their citizens to sort their own trash. Second, by requiring all
waste to be deposited at Authority facilities, the Counties have markedly
increased their ability to enforce recycling laws. If the haulers could take
waste to any disposal site, achieving an equal level of enforcement would be
much more costly, if not impossible. For these reasons, any arguable burden
the ordinances impose on interstate commerce does not exceed their public
benefits.

## * * *

The Counties' ordinances are exercises of the police power in an effort to
address waste disposal, a typical and traditional concern of local government.
The haulers nevertheless ask us to hold that laws favoring public entities
while treating all private businesses the same are subject to an almost _per
se_ rule of invalidity, because of asserted discrimination. In the
alternative, they maintain that the Counties' laws cannot survive the more
permissive _Pike_ test, because of asserted burdens on commerce. There is a
common thread to these arguments: They are invitations to rigorously
scrutinize economic legislation passed under the auspices of the police power.
There was a time when this Court presumed to make such binding judgments for
society, under the guise of interpreting the Due Process Clause. See _Lochner
v. New York,_ 198 U.S. 45, 25 S.Ct. 539, 49 L.Ed. 937 (1905). We should not
seek to reclaim that ground for judicial supremacy under the banner of the
dormant Commerce Clause.

The judgments of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit are
affirmed.

_It is so ordered._

Justice SCALIA, concurring in part.

I join Part I and Parts II-A through II-C of the Court's opinion. I write
separately to reaffirm my view that "the so-called `negative' Commerce Clause
is an unjustified judicial invention, not to be expanded beyond its existing
domain." _General Motors Corp. v. Tracy,_ 519 U.S. 278, 312, 117 S.Ct. 811,
136 L.Ed.2d 761 (1997) (SCALIA, J., concurring). "The historical record
provides no grounds for reading the Commerce Clause to be other than what it
saysan authorization for Congress to regulate commerce." _Tyler Pipe
Industries, Inc. v. Washington State Dept. of Revenue,_ 483 U.S. 232, 263, 107
S.Ct. 2810, 97 L.Ed.2d 199 (1987) (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and
dissenting in part).

I have been willing to enforce on _stare decisis_ grounds a "negative" self-
executing Commerce Clause in two situations: "(1) against a state law that
facially discriminates against interstate commerce, and (2) against a state
law that is indistinguishable from a type of law previously held
unconstitutional by the Court." _West Lynn Creamery, Inc. v. Healy,_ 512 U.S.
186, 210, 114 S.Ct. 2205, 129 L.Ed.2d 157 (1994) *1799 (SCALIA, J., concurring
in judgment). As today's opinion makes clear, the flow-control law at issue in
this case meets neither condition. It benefits a _public entity_ performing a
traditional local-government function and treats _all private entities_
precisely the same way. "Disparate treatment constitutes discrimination only
if the objects of the disparate treatment are, for the relevant purposes,
similarly situated." _Camps Newfound/Owatonna, Inc. v. Town of Harrison,_ 520
U.S. 564, 601, 117 S.Ct. 1590, 137 L.Ed.2d 852 (1997) (SCALIA, J.,
dissenting). None of this Court's cases concludes that public entities and
private entities are similarly situated for Commerce Clause purposes. To hold
that they are "would broaden the negative Commerce Clause beyond its existing
scope, and intrude on a regulatory sphere traditionally occupied by ... the
States." _Tracy, supra,_ at 313, 117 S.Ct. 811 (SCALIA, J., concurring).

I am unable to join Part II-D of the principal opinion, in which the plurality
performs so-called " _Pike_ balancing." Generally speaking, the balancing of
various values is left to Congresswhich is precisely what the Commerce Clause
(the _real_ Commerce Clause) envisions.

Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.

I concur in the judgment. Although I joined _C & A Carbone, Inc. v.
Clarkstown,_ 511 U.S. 383, 114 S.Ct. 1677, 128 L.Ed.2d 399 (1994), I no longer
believe it was correctly decided. The negative Commerce Clause has no basis in
the Constitution and has proved unworkable in practice. See _Camps
Newfound/Owatonna, Inc. v. Town of Harrison,_ 520 U.S. 564, 610-620, 117 S.Ct.
1590, 137 L.Ed.2d 852 (1997) (THOMAS, J., dissenting); _Tyler Pipe Industries,
Inc. v. Washington State Dept. of Revenue,_ 483 U.S. 232, 259-265, 107 S.Ct.
2810, 97 L.Ed.2d 199 (1987) (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and dissenting in
part); _License Cases,_ 5 How. 504, 578-586, 12 L.Ed. 256 (1847) (Taney,
C.J.). As the debate between the majority and dissent shows, application of
the negative Commerce Clause turns solely on policy considerations, not on the
Constitution. Because this Court has no policy role in regulating interstate
commerce, I would discard the Court's negative Commerce Clause jurisprudence.

## I

Under the Commerce Clause, "Congress shall have Power ... [t]o regulate
Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the
Indian Tribes." U.S. Const., Art. I, § 8, cl. 3. The language of the Clause
allows Congress not only to regulate interstate commerce but also to prevent
state regulation of interstate commerce. _State Bd. of Ins. v. Todd Shipyards
Corp.,_ 370 U.S. 451, 456, 82 S.Ct. 1380, 8 L.Ed.2d 620 (1962); _Gibbons v.
Ogden,_ 9 Wheat. 1, 210, 6 L.Ed. 23 (1824). Expanding on the interstate-
commerce powers explicitly conferred on Congress, this Court has interpreted
the Commerce Clause as a tool for courts to strike down state laws that it
believes inhibit interstate commerce. But there is no basis in the
Constitution for that interpretation.

The Court does not contest this point, and simply begins its analysis by
appealing to _stare decisis:_

> "Although the Constitution does not in terms limit the power of States to
> regulate commerce, we have long interpreted the Commerce Clause as an
> implicit restraint on state authority, even in the absence of a conflicting
> federal statute. See _Case of the State Freight Tax,_ 15 Wall. 232, 279[, 21
> L.Ed. 146] (1873); _Cooley v. Board of Wardens of Port of_ *1800
> _Philadelphia ex rel. Soc. for Relief of Distressed Pilots,_ 12 How. 299,
> 318[, 13 L.Ed. 996] (1852)." _Ante,_ at 1792-1793.

The Court's reliance on _Cooley_ and _State Freight Tax_ is curious because
the Court has abandoned the reasoning of those cases in its more recent
jurisprudence. _Cooley_ and _State Freight Tax_ are premised upon the notion
that the Commerce Clause is an exclusive grant of power to Congress over
certain subject areas.[1] _Cooley, supra,_ at 319-320 (holding that
"[w]hatever subjects of this [Commerce Clause] power are in their nature
national, or admit only of one uniform system, or plan of regulation, may
justly be said to be of such a nature as to require exclusive legislation by
[C]ongress" but holding that "the nature of th[e] subject [of state pilotage
laws] is not such as to require its exclusive legislation" and therefore
upholding the state laws against the negative Commerce Clause challenge);
_State Freight Tax, supra,_ at 279-280 (applying the same rationale). The
Court, however, no longer limits Congress' power by analyzing whether the
subjects of state regulation "admit only of one uniform system," _Cooley,
supra,_ at 319. Rather, the modern jurisprudence focuses upon the way in which
States regulate those subjects to decide whether the regulation is
permissible. _E.g., ante,_ at 1792-1793, 1796-1797. Because the reasoning of
_Cooley_ and _State Freight Tax_ has been rejected entirely, they provide no
foundation for today's decision.

Unfazed, the Court proceeds to analyze whether the ordinances "discriminat[e]
on [their] face against interstate commerce." _Ante,_ at 1793. Again, none of
the cases the Court cites explains how the absence or presence of
discrimination is relevant to deciding whether the ordinances are
constitutionally permissible, and at least one case affirmatively admits that
the nondiscrimination rule has no basis in the Constitution. _Philadelphia v.
New Jersey,_ 437 U.S. 617, 623, 98 S.Ct. 2531, 57 L.Ed.2d 475 (1978) ("The
bounds of these restraints appear nowhere in the words of the Commerce Clause,
but have emerged gradually in the decisions of this Court giving effect to its
basic purpose"). Thus cloaked in the "purpose" of the Commerce Clause, the
rule against discrimination that the Court applies to decide this case exists
untethered from the written Constitution. The rule instead depends upon the
policy preferences of a majority of this Court.

The Court's policy preferences are an unsuitable basis for constitutional
doctrine because they shift over time, as demonstrated by the different
theories the Court has offered to support the nondiscrimination principle. In
the early years of the nondiscrimination rule, the Court struck down a state
health law because "the enactment of a similar statute by each one of the
States composing the Union would result in the destruction of commerce among
the several States." _Minnesota v. Barber,_ 136 U.S. 313, 321, 10 S.Ct. 862,
34 L.Ed. 455 (1890); see _Foster-Fountain Packing Co. v. Haydel,_ 278 U.S. 1,
13, 49 S.Ct. 1, 73 L.Ed. 147 (1928) (stating that a Commerce Clause violation
would occur if the state statute would "directly ... obstruct and burden
interstate commerce"). More recently, the Court has struck down state laws
sometimes based on its preference for national unity, see, _e.g.,_ _American
Trucking Assns., Inc. v. Michigan Pub. Serv. Comm'n,_ 545 U.S. 429, 433, 125
S.Ct. 2419, 162 L.Ed.2d 407 (2005) (justifying the non-discrimination *1801
rule by stating that "[o]ur Constitution was framed upon the theory that the
peoples of the several states must sink or swim together" (internal quotation
marks omitted)), and other times on the basis of antiprotectionist sentiment,
see, _e.g.,_ _Oregon Waste Systems, Inc. v. Department of Environmental
Quality of Ore.,_ 511 U.S. 93, 98, 114 S.Ct. 1345, 128 L.Ed.2d 13 (1994)
(noting the interest in "avoid[ing] the tendencies toward economic
Balkanization"); _New Energy Co. of Ind. v. Limbach,_ 486 U.S. 269, 273, 108
S.Ct. 1803, 100 L.Ed.2d 302 (1988) (stating that the negative Commerce Clause
"prohibits economic protectionismthat is, regulatory measures designed to
benefit in-state economic interests by burdening out-of-state competitors");
see also _Carbone,_ 511 U.S., at 390, 114 S.Ct. 1677 ("The central rationale
for the rule against discrimination is to prohibit state or municipal laws
whose object is local economic protectionism, laws that would excite those
jealousies and retaliatory measures the Constitution was designed to
prevent"); _Toomer v. Witsell,_ 334 U.S. 385, 403-404, 68 S.Ct. 1156, 92 L.Ed.
1460 (1948) (striking down a law that "impose[d] an artificial rigidity on the
economic pattern of the industry").

Many of the above-cited cases (and today's majority and dissent) rest on the
erroneous assumption that the Court must choose between economic protectionism
and the free market. But the Constitution vests that fundamentally legislative
choice in Congress. To the extent that Congress does not exercise its
authority to make that choice, the Constitution does not limit the States'
power to regulate commerce. In the face of congressional silence, the States
are free to set the balance between protectionism and the free market. Instead
of accepting this constitutional reality, the Court's negative Commerce Clause
jurisprudence gives nine Justices of this Court the power to decide the
appropriate balance.

## II

As the foregoing demonstrates, despite more than 100 years of negative
Commerce Clause doctrine, there is no principled way to decide this case under
current law. Notably, the Court cannot and does not consider this case "[i]n
light of the language of the Constitution and the historical context." _Alden
v. Maine,_ 527 U.S. 706, 743, 119 S.Ct. 2240, 144 L.Ed.2d 636 (1999).
Likewise, it cannot follow "the cardinal rule to construe provisions in
context." _United States v. Balsys,_ 524 U.S. 666, 673, 118 S.Ct. 2218, 141
L.Ed.2d 575 (1998). And with no text to construe, the Court cannot take into
account the Founders' "deliberate choice of words" or "their natural meaning."
_Wright v. United States,_ 302 U.S. 583, 588, 58 S.Ct. 395, 82 L.Ed. 439
(1938). Furthermore, as the debate between the Court's opinion and the
dissenting opinion reveals, no case law applies to the facts of this case.[2]

Explaining why the ordinances do not discriminate against interstate commerce,
the Court states that "government is vested with the responsibility of
protecting the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens." _Ante,_ at 1795.
According to the Court, a law favoring in-state business requires rigorous
scrutiny because the law "is often the product of `simple economic
protectionism.'" _Ante,_ at 1796. A law favoring local government, however,
"may be directed *1802 toward any number of legitimate goals unrelated to
protectionism." _Ibid._ This distinction is razor thin: In contrast to today's
deferential approach (apparently based on the Court's trust of local
government), the Court has applied the equivalent of strict scrutiny in other
cases even where it is unchallenged that the state law discriminated in favor
of in-state private entities for a legitimate, nonprotectionist reason. See
_Barber, supra,_ at 319, 10 S.Ct. 862 (striking down the State's inspection
law for livestock even though it did not challenge "[t]he presumption that
this statute was enacted, in good faith, ... to protect the health of the
people of Minnesota").

In _Carbone,_ which involved discrimination in favor of private entities, we
did not doubt the good faith of the municipality in attempting to deal with
waste through a flow-control ordinance. 511 U.S., at 386-389, 114 S.Ct. 1677.
But we struck down the ordinance because it did not allow interstate entities
to participate in waste disposal. _Id.,_ at 390-395, 114 S.Ct. 1677. The
majority distinguishes _Carbone_ by deciding that favoritism of a government
monopoly is less suspect than government regulation of private entities.[3] I
see no basis for drawing such a conclusion, which, if anything, suggests a
policy-driven preference for government monopoly over privatization. _Ante,_
at 1796 (stating that "waste disposal is both typically and traditionally a
local government function" (alteration and internal quotation marks omitted)).
Whatever the reason, the choice is not the Court's to make. Like all of the
Court's previous negative Commerce Clause cases, today's decision leaves the
future of state and local regulation of commerce to the whim of the Federal
Judiciary.

## III

Despite its acceptance of negative Commerce Clause jurisprudence, the Court
expresses concern about "unprecedented and unbounded interference by the
courts with state and local government." _Ante,_ at 1796. It explains:

> "The dormant Commerce Clause is not a roving license for federal courts to
> decide what activities are appropriate for state and local government to
> undertake, and what activities must be the province of private market
> competition.

> .....

> "There is no reason to step in and hand local businesses a victory they
> could not obtain through the political process." _Ante,_ at 1795-1796, 1797.

I agree that the Commerce Clause is not a "roving license" and that the Court
should not deliver to businesses victories that they failed to obtain through
the political process. I differ with the Court because I believe its powerful
rhetoric is completely undermined by the doctrine it applies.

In this regard, the Court's analogy to _Lochner v. New York,_ 198 U.S. 45, 25
S.Ct. 539, 49 L.Ed. 937 (1905), suggests that the Court should reject the
negative Commerce Clause, rather than tweak it. _Ante,_ at 1796-1797. In
_Lochner_ the Court located a "right of free contract" in a constitutional
provision that says nothing of the sort. 198 U.S., at 57, 25 S.Ct. 539. The
Court's negative Commerce Clause jurisprudence, created from whole cloth, is
just as illegitimate as the "right" it vindicated in _Lochner._ Yet today's
decision does not repudiate that doctrinal error. Rather, it *1803 further
propagates the error by narrowing the negative Commerce Clause for policy
reasonsreasons that later majorities of this Court may find to be entirely
illegitimate.

In so doing, the majority revisits familiar territory: Just three years after
_Lochner,_ the Court narrowed the right of contract for policy reasons but did
not overrule _Lochner. Muller v. Oregon,_ 208 U.S. 412, 422-423, 28 S.Ct. 324,
52 L.Ed. 551 (1908) (upholding a maximum-hours requirement for women because
the difference between the "two sexes" "justifies a difference in
legislation"). Like the _Muller_ Court, today's majority trifles with an
unsound and illegitimate jurisprudence yet fails to abandon it.

Because I believe that the power to regulate interstate commerce is a power
given to Congress and not the Court, I concur in the judgment of the Court.

Justice ALITO, with whom Justice STEVENS and Justice KENNEDY join, dissenting.

In _C & A Carbone, Inc. v. Clarkstown,_ 511 U.S. 383, 114 S.Ct. 1677, 128
L.Ed.2d 399 (1994), we held that "a so-called flow control ordinance, which
require[d] all solid waste to be processed at a designated transfer station
before leaving the municipality," discriminated against interstate commerce
and was invalid under the Commerce Clause because it "depriv[ed] competitors,
including out-of-state firms, of access to a local market." _Id.,_ at 386, 114
S.Ct. 1677. Because the provisions challenged in this case are essentially
identical to the ordinance invalidated in _Carbone,_ I respectfully dissent.

## I

This Court has "interpreted the Commerce Clause to invalidate local laws that
impose commercial barriers or discriminate against an article of commerce by
reason of its origin or destination out of State." _Id.,_ at 390, 114 S.Ct.
1677. As the Court acknowledges, a law "`"discriminat[es]"'" in this context
if it mandates "`differential treatment of in-state and out-of-state economic
interests'" in a way "`that benefits the former and burdens the latter.'"
_Ante,_ at 1793 (quoting _Oregon Waste Systems, Inc. v. Department of
Environmental Quality of Ore.,_ 511 U.S. 93, 99, 114 S.Ct. 1345, 128 L.Ed.2d
13 (1994)). A local law that discriminates against interstate commerce is
sustainable only if it serves a legitimate local purpose that could not be
served as well by nondiscriminatory means. _Maine v. Taylor,_ 477 U.S. 131,
106 S.Ct. 2440, 91 L.Ed.2d 110 (1986).

"Solid waste, even if it has no value, is an article of commerce." _Fort
Gratiot Sanitary Landfill, Inc. v. Michigan Dept. of Natural Resources,_ 504
U.S. 353, 359, 112 S.Ct. 2019, 119 L.Ed.2d 139 (1992). Accordingly, laws that
"discriminate against [trash] by reason of its origin or destination out of
State," _Carbone,_ 511 U.S., at 390, 114 S.Ct. 1677, are sustainable only if
they serve a legitimate local purpose that could not be served as well by
nondiscriminatory means.

In _Carbone,_ this Court invalidated a local ordinance requiring all
nonhazardous solid waste in Clarkstown, New York, to be deposited at a
specific local transfer facility. The Court concluded that the ordinance
discriminated against interstate commerce because it "hoard[ed] solid waste,
and the demand to get rid of it, for the benefit of the preferred processing
facility." _Id.,_ at 392, 114 S.Ct. 1677.

The Court explained that the flow-control ordinance did serve a purpose that a
nonprotectionist regulation would not: "It ensures that the town-sponsored
facility will be profitable, so that the local contractor *1804 can build it
and Clarkstown can buy it back at nominal cost in five years." _Id.,_ at 393,
114 S.Ct. 1677. "In other words ... the flow control ordinance is a financing
measure." _Ibid._ The Court concluded, however, that "revenue generation is
not a local interest that can justify discrimination against interstate
commerce." _Ibid._

The Court also held that "Clarkstown has any number of nondiscriminatory
alternatives for addressing the health and environmental problems alleged to
justify the ordinance"  including "uniform safety regulations" that could be
enacted to "ensure that competitors ... do not underprice the market by
cutting corners on environmental safety." _Ibid._ Thus, the Court invalidated
the ordinance because any legitimate local interests served by the ordinance
could be accomplished through nondiscriminatory means. See _id.,_ at 392-393,
114 S.Ct. 1677.

This case cannot be meaningfully distinguished from _Carbone._ As the Court
itself acknowledges, "[t]he only salient difference" between the cases is that
the ordinance invalidated in _Carbone_ discriminated in favor of a privately
owned facility, whereas the laws at issue here discriminate in favor of
"facilities owned and operated by a state-created public benefit corporation."
_Ante,_ at 1790. The Court relies on the distinction between public and
private ownership to uphold the flow-control laws, even though a
straightforward application of _Carbone_ would lead to the opposite result.
See _ante,_ at 1795-1796. The public-private distinction drawn by the Court is
both illusory and without precedent.

## II

The fact that the flow control laws at issue discriminate in favor of a
government-owned enterprise does not meaningfully distinguish this case from
_Carbone._ The preferred facility in _Carbone_ was, to be sure, nominally
owned by a private contractor who had built the facility on the town's behalf,
but it would be misleading to describe the facility as private. In exchange
for the contractor's promise to build the facility for the town free of charge
and then to sell it to the town five years later for $1, the town guaranteed
that, during the first five years of the facility's existence, the contractor
would receive "a minimum waste flow of 120,000 tons per year" and that the
contractor could charge an above-market tipping fee. 511 U.S., at 387, 114
S.Ct. 1677. If the facility "received less than 120,000 tons in a year, the
town [would] make up the tipping fee deficit." _Ibid._ To prevent residents,
businesses, and trash haulers from taking their waste elsewhere in pursuit of
lower tipping fees (leaving the town responsible for covering any shortfall in
the contractor's guaranteed revenue stream), the town enacted an ordinance
"requir[ing] all nonhazardous solid waste within the town to be deposited at"
the preferred facility. _Ibid._

This Court observed that "[t]he object of this arrangement was to amortize the
cost of the transfer station: The town would finance _its new facility_ with
the income generated by the tipping fees." _Ibid._ (emphasis added). "In other
words," the Court explained, "the flow control ordinance [wa]s a financing
measure," _id.,_ at 393, 114 S.Ct. 1677, for what everyone including the
Courtregarded as _the town's_ new transfer station.

The only real difference between the facility at issue in _Carbone_ and its
counterpart in this case is that title to the former had not yet formally
passed to the municipality. The Court exalts form over substance in adopting a
test that turns on this technical distinction, particularly since, barring any
obstacle presented by state *1805 law, the transaction in _Carbone_ could have
been restructured to provide for the passage of title at the beginning, rather
than the end, of the 5-year period.

For this very reason, it is not surprising that in _Carbone_ the Court did not
dispute the dissent's observation that the preferred facility was for all
practical purposes owned by the municipality. See _id.,_ at 419, 114 S.Ct.
1677 (opinion of SOUTER, J.) ("Clarkstown's transfer station is essentially a
municipal facility"); _id.,_ at 416, 114 S.Ct. 1677 (describing the nominal
"proprietor" of the transfer station as "essentially an agent of the municipal
government"). To the contrary, the Court repeatedly referred to the transfer
station in terms suggesting that the transfer station did in fact belong to
the town. See _id.,_ at 387, 114 S.Ct. 1677 (explaining that "[t]he town would
finance _its_ new facility with the income generated by the tipping fees"
(emphasis added)); _id.,_ at 393, 114 S.Ct. 1677 (observing that the
challenged flow-control ordinance was designed to "ensur[e] that the town-
sponsored facility will be profitable"); _id.,_ at 394, 114 S.Ct. 1677
(concluding that, "having elected to use the open market to earn revenues for
_its_ project, the town may not employ discriminatory regulation to give that
project an advantage over rival businesses from out of State" (emphasis
added)).

Today the Court dismisses those statements as "at best inconclusive." _Ante,_
at 1794, n. 3. The Court, however, fails to offer any explanation as to what
other meaning could possibly attach to _Carbone's_ repeated references to
Clarkstown's transfer station as a municipal facility. It also ignores the
fact that the ordinance itself, which was included in its entirety in an
appendix to the Court's opinion, repeatedly referred to the station as "the
Town of Clarkstown solid waste facility." 511 U.S., at 396, 398, 399, 114
S.Ct. 1677. The Court likewise fails to acknowledge that the parties in
_Carbone_ openly acknowledged the municipal character of the transfer station.
See Pet. for Cert., O.T. 1993, No. 92-1402, p. 5 (" _The town's_ designated
trash disposal facility is operated by a private contractor, under an
agreement with the town" (emphasis added)); Brief for Petitioner, O.T.1993,
No. 92-1402, p. 26 (arguing that "it is clear that the purported safety and
health benefits of [the flow control ordinance] derive simply from the
continued economic viability of _the town's_ waste facility" (emphasis added;
internal quotation marks omitted)); Brief for Respondent, O.T.1993, No.
92-1402, p. 8 ("The Town entered into a contract with Clarkstown Recycling,
Inc., which provided for that firm to build and operate the new _Town
facility_ " (emphasis added)).

I see no ambiguities in those statements, much less any reason to dismiss them
as "at best inconclusive"; they reflect a clear understanding that the station
was, for all purposes relevant to the dormant Commerce Clause, a municipal
facility.

## III

In any event, we have never treated discriminatory legislation with greater
deference simply because the entity favored by that legislation was a
government-owned enterprise. In suggesting otherwise, the Court relies unduly
on _Carbone's_ passing observation that "`offending local laws hoard a local
resourcebe it meat, shrimp, or milkfor the benefit of _local businesses._ '"
_Ante,_ at ____9 (emphasis in original). _Carbone's_ use of the word
"businesses," the Court insists, somehow reveals that _Carbone_ was not
"extending" our dormant Commerce Clause jurisprudence "to cover discrimination
in favor of local government." _Ibid._

But no "exten[sion]" was required. The Court has long subjected discriminatory
*1806 legislation to strict scrutiny, and has never, until today, recognized
an exception for discrimination in favor of a state-owned entity.

## A

This Court long ago recognized that the Commerce Clause can be violated by a
law that discriminates in favor of a state-owned monopoly. In the 1890's,
South Carolina enacted laws giving a state agency the exclusive right to
operate facilities selling alcoholic beverages within that State, and these
laws were challenged under the Commerce Clause in _Scott v. Donald,_ 165 U.S.
58, 17 S.Ct. 265, 41 L.Ed. 632 (1897), and _Vance v. W.A. Vandercook Co.,_ 170
U.S. 438, 18 S.Ct. 674, 42 L.Ed. 1100 (1898). The Court held that the Commerce
Clause barred the State from prohibiting its residents from purchasing alcohol
from out-of-state vendors, see _id.,_ at 442, 18 S.Ct. 674, but that the State
could surmount this problem by allowing residents to receive out-of-state
shipments for their personal use. See _id.,_ at 452, 18 S.Ct. 674. The Court's
holding was based on the same fundamental dormant Commerce Clause principle
applied in _Carbone._ [1] As the Court put it in _Vance,_ a State "`cannot
discriminate against the bringing of [lawful] articles in and importing them
from other States'" because such discrimination is "`a hindrance to interstate
commerce and an unjust preference of the products of the enacting State as
against similar products of other States.'" 170 U.S., at 443, 18 S.Ct. 674
(quoting _Scott, supra,_ at 101, 17 S.Ct. 265). Cf., _Carbone, supra,_ at 390,
114 S.Ct. 1677 (the Commerce Clause bars state and local laws that "impose
commercial barriers or discriminate against an article of commerce by reason
of its origin or destination out of State").

Thus, were it not for the Twenty-first Amendment, laws creating state-owned
liquor monopolieswhich many States maintain todaywould be deemed
discriminatory under the dormant Commerce Clause. See _Granholm v. Heald,_ 544
U.S. 460, 489, 125 S.Ct. 1885, 161 L.Ed.2d 796 (2005) (explaining that the
Twenty-first Amendment makes it possible for States to "assume direct control
of liquor distribution through state-run outlets"); see _id.,_ at 517-518, 125
S.Ct. 1885 (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (noting that, although laws creating a
"state monopoly" in the sale of liquor "discriminat[e]" against interstate
commerce, they are "within the ambit of the Twenty-first Amendment" and are
therefore immune from scrutiny under the dormant Commerce Clause). There is,
of course, no comparable provision in the Constitution authorizing States to
discriminate against out-of-state providers of waste processing and disposal
services, either by means of a government-owned monopoly or otherwise.

## B

Nor has this Court ever suggested that discriminatory legislation favoring a
state-owned enterprise is entitled to favorable treatment. To be sure, state-
owned entities are accorded special status under the market-participant
doctrine. But that doctrine is not applicable here.

Under the market-participant doctrine, a State is permitted to exercise
"`independent discretion as to parties with whom [it] *1807 will deal.'"
_Reeves, Inc. v. Stake,_ 447 U.S. 429, 438-439, 100 S.Ct. 2271, 65 L.Ed.2d 244
(1980). The doctrine thus allows States to engage in certain otherwise-
discriminatory practices ( _e.g.,_ selling exclusively to, or buying
exclusively from, the State's own residents), so long as the State is "acting
as a market participant, _rather than as a market regulator,_ " _South-Central
Timber Development, Inc. v. Wunnicke,_ 467 U.S. 82, 93, 104 S.Ct. 2237, 81
L.Ed.2d 71 (1984) (emphasis added).

Respondents are doing exactly what the market-participant doctrine says they
cannot: While acting as market participants by operating a fee-for-service
business enterprise in an area in which there is an established interstate
market, respondents are also regulating that market in a discriminatory manner
and claiming that their special governmental status somehow insulates them
from a dormant Commerce Clause challenge. See _ibid._

Respondents insist that the market-participant doctrine has no application
here because they are not asserting a defense under the market-participant
doctrine, Brief for Respondents 24-25, but that argument misses the point.
Regardless of whether respondents can assert a defense under the market-
participant doctrine, this Court's cases make clear that States cannot
discriminate against interstate commerce unless they are acting solely as
market participants. Today, however, the Court suggests, contrary to its prior
holdings, that States can discriminate in favor of in-state interests while
acting both as a market participant _and_ as a market regulator.

## IV

Despite precedent condemning discrimination in favor of government-owned
enterprises, the Court attempts to develop a logical justification for the
rule it creates today. That justification rests on three principal assertions.
First, the Court insists that it simply "does not make sense to regard laws
favoring local government and laws favoring private industry with equal
skepticism," because the latter are "often the product of `simple economic
protectionism,'" _ante,_ at 1795-1796 (quoting _Wyoming v. Oklahoma,_ 502 U.S.
437, 454, 112 S.Ct. 789, 117 L.Ed.2d 1 (1992)), while the former "may be
directed toward any number of legitimate goals unrelated to protectionism,"
_ante,_ at 1796. Second, the Court reasons that deference to legislation
discriminating in favor of a municipal landfill is especially appropriate
considering that "`[w]aste disposal is both typically and traditionally a
local government function.'" _Ante,_ at 1796 (quoting 261 F.3d 245, 264 (C.A.2
2001) (Calabresi, J., concurring)). Third, the Court suggests that
respondents' flow-control laws are not discriminatory because they "treat in-
state private business interests exactly the same as out-of-state ones."
_Ante,_ at 1797. I find each of these arguments unpersuasive.

## A

I see no basis for the Court's assumption that discrimination in favor of an
in-state facility owned by the government is likely to serve "legitimate goals
unrelated to protectionism." Discrimination in favor of an in-state government
facility serves "`local economic interests,'" _Carbone,_ 511 U.S., at 404, 114
S.Ct. 1677 (O'Connor, J., concurring in judgment) (quoting _Raymond Motor
Transp., Inc. v. Rice,_ 434 U.S. 429, 444, n. 18, 98 S.Ct. 787, 54 L.Ed.2d 664
(1978)), inuring to the benefit of local residents who are employed at the
facility, local businesses that supply the facility with goods and services,
and local workers employed by such businesses. It is therefore surprising to
read in the opinion *1808 of the Court that state discrimination in favor of a
state-owned business is not likely to be motivated by economic protectionism.

Experience in other countries, where state ownership is more common than it is
in this country, teaches that governments often discriminate in favor of
state-owned businesses (by shielding them from international competition)
precisely for the purpose of protecting those who derive economic benefits
from those businesses, including their employees.[2] Such discrimination
amounts to economic protectionism in any realistic sense of the term.[3]

By the same token, discrimination in favor of an in-state, privately owned
facility may serve legitimate ends, such as the promotion of public health and
safety. For example, a State might enact legislation discriminating in favor
of produce or livestock grown within the State, reasoning that the State's
inspectors can more easily monitor the use of pesticides, fertilizers, and
feed on farms within the State's borders. Such legislation would almost
certainly be unconstitutional, notwithstanding its potential to promote public
health and safety. See _Philadelphia v. New Jersey,_ 437 U.S. 617, 627, 98
S.Ct. 2531, 57 L.Ed.2d 475 (1978) (noting that the Court has repeatedly
invalidated legislation where "a presumably legitimate goal was sought to be
achieved by the illegitimate means of isolating the State from the national
economy").

The fallacy in the Court's approach can be illustrated by comparing a law that
discriminates in favor of an in-state facility, owned by a corporation whose
shares are publicly held, and a law discriminating in favor of an otherwise
identical facility that is owned by the State or municipality. Those who are
favored and disfavored by these two laws are essentially the same with one
major exception: The law favoring the corporate facility presumably benefits
the corporation's shareholders, most of whom are probably not local residents,
whereas the law favoring the government-owned facility presumably benefits the
people of the enacting State or municipality. I cannot understand why only the
former law, and not the latter, should be regarded as a tool of economic
protectionism. Nor do I think it is realistic or consistent with our
precedents to condemn some discriminatory laws as protectionist while
upholding other, equally discriminatory laws as lawful measures designed to
serve legitimate local interests unrelated to protectionism.

For these reasons, I cannot accept the proposition that laws discriminating in
favor of state-owned enterprises are so unlikely to be the product of economic
protectionism that they should be exempt *1809 from the usual dormant Commerce
Clause standards.

Proper analysis under the dormant Commerce Clause involves more than an
inquiry into whether the challenged Act is in some sense "directed toward ...
legitimate goals unrelated to protectionism"; equally important are the means
by which those goals are realized. If the chosen means take the form of a
statute that discriminates against interstate commerce  "`either on its face
or in practical effect'"  then "the burden falls on [the enacting government]
to demonstrate both that the statute `serves a legitimate local purpose,' and
that this purpose could not be served as well by available nondiscriminatory
means." _Taylor,_ 477 U.S., at 138, 106 S.Ct. 2440 (quoting _Hughes v.
Oklahoma,_ 441 U.S. 322, 336, 99 S.Ct. 1727, 60 L.Ed.2d 250 (1979)).

Thus, if the legislative _means_ are themselves discriminatory, then
regardless of how legitimate and nonprotectionist the underlying legislative
_goals_ may be, the legislation is subject to strict scrutiny. Similarly, the
fact that a discriminatory law "may [in some sense] be directed toward any
number of legitimate goals unrelated to protectionism" does not make the law
nondiscriminatory. The existence of such goals is relevant, not to whether the
law is discriminatory, but to whether the law can be allowed to stand even
though it discriminates against interstate commerce. And even then, the
existence of legitimate goals is not enough; discriminatory legislation can be
upheld only where such goals cannot adequately be achieved through
nondiscriminatory means. See, _e.g.,_ _Philadelphia, supra,_ at 626-627, 98
S.Ct. 2531 ("[T]he evil of protectionism can reside in legislative means as
well as legislative ends," such that "whatever [the State's] purpose, it may
not be accomplished by discriminating against articles of commerce coming from
outside the State unless there is some reason, apart from their origin, to
treat them differently"); _Hunt v. Washington State Apple Advertising Comm'n,_
432 U.S. 333, 352-353, 97 S.Ct. 2434, 53 L.Ed.2d 383 (1977) (explaining that
"we need not ascribe an economic protection motive to" discriminatory laws;
such laws are subject to strict scrutiny even "if enacted for the declared
purpose of protecting consumers from deception and fraud in the marketplace").

_Dean Milk Co. v. Madison,_ 340 U.S. 349, 71 S.Ct. 295, 95 L.Ed. 329 (1951),
is instructive on this point. That case involved a dormant Commerce Clause
challenge to an ordinance requiring all milk sold in Madison, Wisconsin, to be
processed within five miles of the city's central square. See _id.,_ at 350,
71 S.Ct. 295. The ordinance "professe[d] to be a health measure," _id.,_ at
354, 71 S.Ct. 295, and may have conferred some benefit on the city and its
residents to the extent that it succeeded in guaranteeing the purity and
quality of the milk sold in the city. The Court nevertheless invalidated the
ordinance, concluding that any public health benefits it may have conferred
could be achieved through "reasonable nondiscriminatory alternatives,"
including a system that would allow a nonlocal dairy to qualify to sell milk
in the city upon proving that it was in compliance with applicable health and
safety requirements. _Id.,_ at 354-356, 71 S.Ct. 295.

The Court did not inquire whether the real purpose of the ordinance was to
benefit public health and safety or to protect local economic interests; nor
did the Court make any effort to determine whether or to what extent the
ordinance may have succeeded in promoting health and safety. In fact, the
Court apparently assumed that the ordinance could fairly be characterized as
"a health measure." _Id.,_ at 354, 71 *1810 S.Ct. 295. The Court nevertheless
concluded that the ordinance could not stand because it "erect[ed] an economic
barrier protecting a major local industry against competition from without the
State," "plac[ed] a discriminatory burden on interstate commerce," and was
"not essential for the protection of local health interests." _Id.,_ at 354,
356, 71 S.Ct. 295.

The overarching concern expressed by the Court was that the ordinance, if left
intact, "would invite a multiplication of preferential trade areas destructive
of the very purpose of the Commerce Clause." _Id.,_ at 356, 71 S.Ct. 295.
"Under the circumstances here presented," the Court concluded, "the regulation
must yield to the principle that `one state in its dealings with another may
not place itself in a position of economic isolation.'" _Ibid._ (quoting
_Baldwin v. G.A.F. Seelig, Inc.,_ 294 U.S. 511, 527, 55 S.Ct. 497, 79 L.Ed.
1032 (1935)).

The same reasoning dooms the laws challenged here. Like the ordinance in _Dean
Milk,_ these laws discriminate against interstate commerce (generally favoring
local interests over nonlocal interests), but are defended on the ground that
they serve legitimate goals unrelated to protectionism ( _e.g.,_ health,
safety, and protection of the environment). And while I do not question that
the laws at issue in this case serve legitimate goals, the laws offend the
dormant Commerce Clause because those goals could be attained effectively
through nondiscriminatory means. Indeed, no less than in _Carbone,_ those
goals could be achieved through "uniform [health and] safety regulations
enacted without the object to discriminate" that "would ensure that
competitors [to the municipal program] do not underprice the market by cutting
corners on environmental safety." 511 U.S., at 393, 114 S.Ct. 1677.
Respondents would also be free, of course, to "subsidize the[ir] [program]
through general taxes or municipal bonds." _Id.,_ at 394, 114 S.Ct. 1677. "But
having elected to use the open market to earn revenues for" their waste
management program, respondents "may not employ discriminatory regulation to
give that [program] an advantage over rival businesses from out of State."
_Ibid._

## B

The Court next suggests that deference to legislation discriminating in favor
of a municipal landfill is especially appropriate considering that "`[w]aste
disposal is both typically and traditionally a local government function.'"
_Ante,_ at 1796 (quoting 261 F.3d, at 264 (Calabresi, J., concurring)). I
disagree on two grounds.

First, this Court has previously recognized that any standard "that turns on a
judicial appraisal of whether a particular governmental function is `integral'
or `traditional'" is "`unsound in principle and unworkable in practice.'"
_Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority,_ 469 U.S. 528, 546-547,
105 S.Ct. 1005, 83 L.Ed.2d 1016 (1985). Indeed, the Court has _twice_
experimented with such standardsfirst in the context of intergovernmental tax
immunity, see _South Carolina v. United States,_ 199 U.S. 437, 26 S.Ct. 110,
50 L.Ed. 261 (1905), and more recently in the context of state regulatory
immunity under the Commerce Clause, see _National League of Cities v. Usery,_
426 U.S. 833, 96 S.Ct. 2465, 49 L.Ed.2d 245 (1976) only to abandon them later
as analytically unsound. See _Garcia, supra,_ at 547, 105 S.Ct. 1005
(overruling _National League of Cities_ ); _New York v. United States,_ 326
U.S. 572, 66 S.Ct. 310, 90 L.Ed. 326 (1946) (overruling _South Carolina v.
United States_ ). Thus, to the extent today's holding rests on a distinction
between "traditional" governmental functions and their *1811 nontraditional
counterparts, see _ante,_ at 1795-1796, it cannot be reconciled with prior
precedent.

Second, although many municipalities in this country have long assumed
responsibility for disposing of local garbage, see _Carbone, supra,_ at
419-420, and n. 10, 114 S.Ct. 1677 (SOUTER, J., dissenting), most of the
garbage produced in this country is still managed by the private sector. See
Brief for National Solid Wastes Management Association et al. as _Amici
Curiae_ 22 ("Today, nearly two-thirds of solid waste received at landfills is
received at private sector landfills"); R.W. Beck, Inc. et al., Size of the
United States Solid Waste Industry, p. ES-3 (Apr.2001) (study sponsored by the
Environmental Research and Education Foundation) (noting that in 1999, 69.2%
of the solid waste produced in the United States was managed by privately
owned businesses). In that respect, the Court is simply mistaken in concluding
that waste disposal is "typically" a local government function.

Moreover, especially considering the Court's recognition that "`any notion of
discrimination assumes a comparison of substantially similar entities,'"
_ante,_ at 1795 (quoting _General Motors Corp. v. Tracy,_ 519 U.S. 278, 298,
117 S.Ct. 811, 136 L.Ed.2d 761 (1997)), a "traditional" municipal landfill is
for present purposes entirely different from a monopolistic landfill supported
by the kind of discriminatory legislation at issue in this case and in
_Carbone._ While the former may be rooted in history and tradition, the latter
has been deemed unconstitutional until today. See _Carbone, supra,_ at
392-393, 114 S.Ct. 1677. It is therefore far from clear that the laws at issue
here can fairly be described as serving a function "typically and
traditionally" performed by local governments.

## C

Equally unpersuasive is the Court's suggestion that the flow-control laws do
not discriminate against interstate commerce because they "treat in-state
private business interests exactly the same as out-of-state ones." _Ante,_ at
1797. Again, the critical issue is whether the challenged legislation
discriminates against interstate commerce. If it does, then regardless of
whether those harmed by it reside entirely outside the State in question, the
law is subject to strict scrutiny. Indeed, this Court has long recognized that
"`a burden imposed by a State upon interstate commerce is not to be sustained
simply because the statute imposing it applies alike to the people of all the
States, including the people of the State enacting such statute.'" _Brimmer v.
Rebman,_ 138 U.S. 78, 83, 11 S.Ct. 213, 34 L.Ed. 862 (1891) (quoting
_Minnesota v. Barber,_ 136 U.S. 313, 326, 10 S.Ct. 862, 34 L.Ed. 455 (1890));
accord, _Fort Gratiot Sanitary Landfill, Inc.,_ 504 U.S., at 361-363, 112
S.Ct. 2019; _Dean Milk,_ 340 U.S., at 354, n. 4, 71 S.Ct. 295. It therefore
makes no difference that the flow-control laws at issue here apply to in-state
and out-of-state businesses alike.[4] See _Carbone, supra,_ at 391, 114 S.Ct.
1677 ("The [flow-control] ordinance is no less discriminatory because in-state
or in-town processors are also covered by the prohibition").

##  *1812 * * *

The dormant Commerce Clause has long been understood to prohibit the kind of
discriminatory legislation upheld by the Court in this case. I would therefore
reverse the decision of the Court of Appeals.

## NOTES

[1] Tipping fees are disposal charges levied against collectors who drop off
waste at a processing facility. They are called "tipping" fees because garbage
trucks literally tip their back end to dump out the carried waste. As of 1995,
haulers in the Counties had to pay tipping fees of at least $86 per ton, a
price that ballooned to as much as $172 per ton if a particular load contained
more than 25% recyclables.

[2] Oneida's flow control ordinance provides in part:

"From the time of placement of solid waste and of recyclables at the roadside
or other designated area approved by the County or by the Authority pursuant
to contract with the County, or by a person for collection in accordance
herewith, such solid waste and recyclables shall be delivered to the
appropriate facility, entity or person responsible for disposition designated
by the County or by the Authority pursuant to contract with the Authority."
App. to Pet. for Cert. 122a.

The relevant portion of Herkimer's flow control ordinance is substantially
similar:

"After placement of garbage and of recyclable materials at the roadside or
other designated area approved by the Legislature by a person for collection
in accordance herewith, such garbage and recyclable material shall be
delivered to the appropriate facility designated by the Legislature, or by the
Authority pursuant to contract with the County." _Id.,_ at 135a.

[3] Each side makes much of the _Carbone_ majority's various descriptions of
the facility. The haulers point out that the Court twice referred to the
construction and financing of the transfer station as the town's project. See
511 U.S., at 387, 114 S.Ct. 1677 ("its new facility"), 394, 114 S.Ct. 1677
("its project"); Brief for Petitioners 20-22. The Counties note that the
majority referred to the transfer station as a "town-sponsored facility,"
_Carbone,_ 511 U.S., at 393, 114 S.Ct. 1677, a "favored local operator,"
_id.,_ at 389, 114 S.Ct. 1677, "the preferred processing facility," a "single
local proprietor," and a "local business," _id.,_ at 392, 114 S.Ct. 1677, but
never as a _public_ facility. Brief for Respondents 17, n. 7. The dissent has
mined the _Carbone_ decision, appendix, and briefs for further instances of
allegedly supportive terminology, _post,_ at 1804-1805 (opinion of ALITO, J.)
but we continue to find this duel of labels at best inconclusive.

[4] See _South-Central Timber Development, Inc. v. Wunnicke,_ 467 U.S. 82, 104
S.Ct. 2237, 81 L.Ed.2d 71 (1984) (invalidating Alaska regulation requiring all
Alaskan timber to be processed in-state prior to export); _Pike v. Bruce
Church, Inc.,_ 397 U.S. 137, 90 S.Ct. 844, 25 L.Ed.2d 174 (1970) (invalidating
application of an Arizona statute to require Arizona-grown cantaloupes to be
packaged within the State before export); _Toomer v. Witsell,_ 334 U.S. 385,
68 S.Ct. 1156, 92 L.Ed. 1460 (1948) (invalidating South Carolina statute
requiring shrimp fisherman to unload, pack, and stamp their catch before
shipping it to another State); _Foster-Fountain Packing Co. v. Haydel,_ 278
U.S. 1, 49 S.Ct. 1, 73 L.Ed. 147 (1928) (invalidating a Louisiana statute
prohibiting the export of shrimp unless the heads and hulls had first been
removed within the State); _Johnson v. Haydel,_ 278 U.S. 16, 49 S.Ct. 6, 73
L.Ed. 155 (1928) (invalidating analogous Louisiana statute for oysters);
_Minnesota v. Barber,_ 136 U.S. 313, 10 S.Ct. 862, 34 L.Ed. 455 (1890)
(invalidating Minnesota law requiring any meat sold within the State to be
examined by an in-state inspector). _Dean Milk Co. v. Madison,_ 340 U.S. 349,
71 S.Ct. 295, 95 L.Ed. 329 (1951) (invalidating local ordinance requiring all
milk sold in the city to be pasteurized within five miles of the city
center)discussed elsewhere in _Carbone_ and in the dissent here, _post,_ at
1809-1810 is readily distinguishable on the same ground.

[5] The dissent asserts that the Court "long ago recognized that the Commerce
Clause can be violated by a law that discriminates in favor of a state-owned
monopoly." _Post,_ at 1806. The authority it cites _Scott v. Donald,_ 165
U.S. 58, 17 S.Ct. 265, 41 L.Ed. 632 (1897), and _Vance v. W.A. Vandercook
Co.,_ 170 U.S. 438, 442, 18 S.Ct. 674, 42 L.Ed. 1100 (1898)certainly
qualifies as from "long ago," but does not support the proposition. _Scott_
struck down two laws that discriminated in favor of in-state businesses and
against out-of-state businesses; neither law favored local government at the
expense of all private industry. See 165 U.S., at 92-93, 101, 17 S.Ct. 265;
_Granholm v. Heald,_ 544 U.S. 460, 478-479, 125 S.Ct. 1885, 161 L.Ed.2d 796
(2005) (describing _Scott_ holding). _Scott_ is simply another case like those
cited in footnote 4.

_Vance_ actually _upheld_ "South Carolina's monopoly over liquor
distribution[,] ... reject[ing] the argument that this monopoly system was
unconstitutionally discriminatory." _Granholm, supra,_ at 507, 125 S.Ct. 1885
(THOMAS, J., dissenting) (citing _Vance, supra,_ at 450-452, 18 S.Ct. 674). It
was the _dissent_ in _Vance_ that argued that "such a state monopoly system
constituted unconstitutional discrimination." _Granholm, supra,_ at 507, 125
S.Ct. 1885 (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (citing 170 U.S., at 462-468, 18 S.Ct. 674
(opinion of Shiras, J.)). The _Vance_ Court simply struck down a regulation on
direct shipments to consumers for personal use, under the Court's
excruciatingly arcane pre-Prohibition precedents. See 170 U.S., at 455, 18
S.Ct. 674. Most tellingly, _Vance_ harkens back to a bygone era; until the
dissent today, it had been cited by this Court in only two cases in the past
60 years.

[6] Justice THOMAS is thus wrong in stating that our approach might suggest "a
policy-driven preference for government monopoly over privatization." _Post,_
at 1806 (opinion concurring in judgment). That is instead the preference of
the affected locality here. Our opinion simply recognizes that a law favoring
a public entity and treating all private entities the same does not
discriminate against interstate commerce as does a law favoring local business
over all others.

[7] The Counties and their _amicus_ were asked at oral argument if affirmance
would lead to the "Oneida-Herkimer Hamburger Stand," accompanied by a "flow
control" law requiring citizens to purchase their burgers only from the state-
owned producer. Tr. of Oral Arg. 33-34 (Counties), 45-46, 49-50 ( _amicus_
State of New York). We doubt it. "The existence of major in-state interests
adversely affected by [a law] is a powerful safeguard against legislative
abuse." _Minnesota v. Clover Leaf Creamery Co.,_ 449 U.S. 456, 473, n. 17, 101
S.Ct. 715, 66 L.Ed.2d 659 (1981). Recognizing that local government may
facilitate a customary and traditional government function such as waste
disposal, without running afoul of the Commerce Clause, is hardly a
prescription for state control of the economy. In any event, Congress retains
authority under the Commerce Clause as written to regulate interstate
commerce, whether engaged in by private or public entities. It can use this
power, as it has in the past, to limit state use of exclusive franchises. See,
_e.g.,_ _Gibbons v. Ogden,_ 9 Wheat. 1, 221, 6 L.Ed. 23 (1824).

[1] This justification for the negative Commerce Clause is itself unsupported
by the Constitution. See _Tyler Pipe Industries, Inc. v. Washington State
Dept. of Revenue,_ 483 U.S. 232, 261-262, 107 S.Ct. 2810, 97 L.Ed.2d 199
(1987) (SCALIA, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).

[2] No previous case addresses the question whether the negative Commerce
Clause applies to favoritism of a government entity. I agree with the Court
that _C & A Carbone, Inc. v. Clarkstown,_ 511 U.S. 383, 114 S.Ct. 1677, 128
L.Ed.2d 399 (1994), did not resolve this issue. _Ante,_ at 1792-1795.

[3] The dissent argues that such a preference is unwarranted. _Post,_ at
1808-1809 (opinion of ALITO, J.) ("I cannot accept the proposition that laws
discriminating in favor of state-owned enterprises are so unlikely to be the
product of economic protectionism that they should be exempt from the usual
dormant Commerce Clause standards").

[1] See _Granholm v. Heald,_ 544 U.S. 460, 517-518, 125 S.Ct. 1885, 161
L.Ed.2d 796 (2005) (THOMAS, J., dissenting) ("These liquor regulation schemes
discriminated against out-of-state economic interests .... State monopolies
that did not permit direct shipments to consumers, for example, were thought
to discriminate against out-of-state wholesalers and retailers ..." (citing
_Vance,_ 170 U.S., at 451-452, 18 S.Ct. 674)).

[2] See, _e.g.,_ Owen, Sun, & Zheng, Antitrust in China: The Problem of
Incentive Compatibility, 1 J. of Competition L. & Econ. 123, 131-133 (2005);
Qin, WTO Regulation of Subsidies to State-owned Enterprises (SOEs)A Critical
Appraisal of the China Accession Protocol, 7 J. of Int'l Econ. L. 863, 869-876
(Dec.2004).

[3] It therefore seems strange that the Commerce Clause, which has
historically been understood to protect free trade and prohibit States from
"plac[ing] [themselves] in a position of economic isolation," _Baldwin v.
G.A.F. Seelig, Inc.,_ 294 U.S. 511, 527, 55 S.Ct. 497, 79 L.Ed. 1032 (1935),
is now being construed to condone blatantly protectionist laws on grounds that
such legislation is necessary to support governmental efforts to commandeer
the local market for a particular good or service. In adopting that
construction, the Court sends a bold and enticing message to local governments
throughout the United States: Protectionist legislation is now permissible, so
long as the enacting government excludes all private-sector participants from
the affected local market.

[4] A law granting monopoly rights to a single, local business clearly would
not be immune from a dormant Commerce Clause challenge simply because it
excluded both in-state and out-of-state competitors from the local market. See
_C & A Carbone, Inc. v. Clarkstown,_ 511 U.S. 383, 391, 114 S.Ct. 1677, 128
L.Ed.2d 399 (1994). It is therefore strange for the Court to attach any
significance to the fact that the flow-control laws at issue here apply to in-
state and out-of-state competitors alike.

