312 U.S. 100

61 S.Ct. 451

312 U.S. 657

85 L.Ed. 609

UNITED STATES  
v.  
DARBY.

No. 82.

Argued Dec. 19, 20, 1940.

Decided Feb. 3, 1941.

As Amended Feb. 17, 1941.

[Syllabus from pages 100-102 intentionally omitted]

Messrs. Robert H. Jackson, Atty. Gen., and Francis Biddle, Sol. Gen., for
appellant.

[Argument of Counsel from pages 102-104 intentionally omitted]

Mr. Archibald B. Lovett, of Savannah, Ga., for appellee.

[Argument of Counsel from Pages 105-107 intentionally omitted]

Mr. Justice STONE delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

The two principal questions raised by the record in this case are, first,
whether Congress has constitutional power to prohibit the shipment in
interstate commerce of lumber manufactured by employees whose wages are less
than a prescribed minimum or whose weekly hours of labor at that wage are
greater than a prescribed maximum, and, second, whether it has power to
prohibit the employment of workmen in the production of goods 'for interstate
commerce' at other than prescribed wages and hours. A subsidiary question is
whether in connection with such prohibitions Congress can require the employer
subject to them to keep records showing the hours worked each day and week by
each of his employees including those engaged 'in the production and
manufacture of goods to wit, lumber, for 'interstate commerce."

2

Appellee demurred to an indictment found in the district court for southern
Georgia charging him with violation of § 15(a)(1)(2) and (5) of the Fair Labor
Standards Act of 1938, 52 Stat. 1060, 29 U.S.C. § 201, et seq., 29 U.S.C.A. §
201 et seq. The district court sustained the demurrer and quashed the
indictment and the case comes here on direct appeal under § 238 of the
Judicial Code as amended, 28 U.S.C. § 345, 28 U.S.C.A. § 345, and § 682, Title
18 U.S.C., 34 Stat. 1246, 18 U.S.C.A. § 682, which authorizes an appeal to
this Court when the judgment sustaining the demurrer 'is based upon the
invalidity, or construction of the statute upon which the indictment is
founded'.

3

The Fair Labor Standards Act set up a comprehensive legislative scheme for
preventing the shipment in interstate commerce of certain products and
commodities produced in the United States under labor conditions as respects
wages and hours which fail to conform to standards set up by the Act. Its
purpose, as we judicially know from the declaration of policy in § 2(a) of the
Act,1 and the reports of Congressional committees proposing the legislation,
S.Rept. No. 884, 75th Cong. 1st Sess.; H.Rept. No. 1452, 75th Cong. 1st Sess.;
H.Rept. No. 2182, 75th Cong. 3d Sess., Conference Report, H.Rept. No. 2738,
75th Cong. 3d Sess., is to exclude from interstate commerce goods produced for
the commerce and to prevent their production for interstate commerce, under
conditions detrimental to the maintenance of the minimum standards of living
necessary for health and general well-being; and to prevent the use of
interstate commerce as the means of competition in the distribution of goods
so produced, and as the means of spreading and perpetuating such substandard
labor conditions among the workers of the several states. The Act also sets up
an administrative procedure whereby those standards may from time to time be
modified generally as to industries subject to the Act or within an industry
in accordance with specified standards, by an administrator acting in
collaboration with 'Industry Committees' appointed by him.

4

Section 15 of the statute prohibits certain specified acts and § 16(a)
punishes willful violation of it by a fine of not more than $10,000 and
punishes each conviction after the first by imprisonment of not more than six
months or by the specified fine or both. Section 15(a)(1) makes unlawful the
shipment in interstate commerce of any goods 'in the production of which any
employee was employed in violation of section 6(206) or section 7(207)', which
provide, among other things, that during the first year of operation of the
Act a minimum wage of 25 cents per hour shall be paid to employees 'engaged in
(interstate) commerce or in the production of goods for (interstate)
commerce,' § 6, and that the maximum hours of employment for employees
'engaged in commerce or in the production of goods for commerce' without
increased compensation for overtime, shall be forty-four hours a week. § 7.

5

Section 15(a)(2) makes it unlawful to violate the provisions of §§ 6 and 7
including the minimum wage and maximum hour requirements just mentioned for
employees engaged in production of goods for commerce. Section 15(a)(5) makes
it unlawful for an employer subject to the Act to violate § 11(c) which
requires him to keep such records of the persons employed by him and of their
wages and hours of employment as the administrator shall prescribe by
regulation or order.

6

The indictment charges that appellee is engaged, in the state of Georgia, in
the business of acquiring raw materials, which he manufactures into finished
lumber with the intent, when manufactured, to ship it in interstate commerce
to customers outside the state, and that he does in fact so ship a large part
of the lumber so produced. There are numerous counts charging appellee with
the shipment in interstate commerce from Georgia to points outside the state
of lumber in the production of which, for interstate commerce, appellee has
employed workmen at less than the prescribed minimum wage or more than the
prescribed maximum hours without payment to them of any wage for overtime.
Other counts charge the employment by appellee of workmen in the production of
lumber for interstate commerce at wages of less than 25 cents an hour or for
more than the maximum hours per week without payment to them of the prescribed
overtime wage. Still another count charges appellee with failure to keep
records showing the hours worked each day a week by each of his employees as
required by § 11(c) and the regulation of the administrator, Title 29, Ch. 5,
Code of Federal Regulations, Part 516, and also that appellee unlawfully
failed to keep such records of employees engaged 'in the production and
manufacture of goods, to-wit lumber, for interstate commerce'.

7

The demurrer, so far as now relevant to the appeal, challenged the validity of
the Fair Labor Standards Act under the Commerce Clause, Art. 1, § 8, cl. 3,
and the Fifth and Tenth Amendments. The district court quashed the indictment
in its entirety upon the broad grounds that the Act, which it interpreted as a
regulation of manufacture within the states, is unconstitutional. It declared
that manufacture is not interstate commerce and that the regulation by the
Fair Labor Standards Act of wages and hours of employment of those engaged in
the manufacture of goods which it is intended at the time of production 'may
or will be' after production 'sold in interstate commerce in part or in whole'
is not within the congressional power to regulate interstate commerce.

8

The effect of the court's decision and judgment are thus to deny the power of
Congress to prohibit shipment in interstate commerce of lumber produced for
interstate commerce under the proscribed substandard labor conditions of wages
and hours, its power to penalize the employer for his failure to conform to
the wage and hour provisions in the case of employees engaged in the
production of lumber which he intends thereafter to ship in interstate
commerce in part or in whole according to the normal course of his business
and its power to compel him to keep records of hours of employment as required
by the statute and the regulations of the administrator.

9

The case comes here on assignments by the Government that the district court
erred insofar as it held that Congress was without constitutional power to
penalize the acts set forth in the indictment, and appellees seek to sustain
the decision below on the grounds that the prohibition by Congress of those
Acts is unauthorized by the commerce clause and is prohibited by the Fifth
Amendment. The appeals statute limits our jurisdiction on this appeal to a
review of the determination of the district court so far only as it is based
on the validity or construction of the statute. United States v. Borden Co.,
308 U.S. 188, 193, 195, 60 S.Ct. 182, 185, 186, 84 L.Ed. 181, and cases cited.
Hence we accept the district court's interpretation of the indictment and
confine our decision to the validity and construction of the statute.

10

The prohibition of shipment of the proscribed goods in interstate commerce.
Section 15(a)(1) prohibits, and the indictment charges, the shipment in
interstate commerce, of goods produced for interstate commerce by employees
whose wages and hours of employment do not conform to the requirements of the
Act. Since this section is not violated unless the commodity shipped has been
produced under labor conditions prohibited by § 6 and § 7, the only question
arising under the commerce clause with respect to such shipments is whether
Congress has the constitutional power to prohibit them.

11

While manufacture is not of itself interstate commerce the shipment of
manufactured goods interstate is such commerce and the prohibition of such
shipment by Congress is indubitably a regulation of the commerce. The power to
regulate commerce is the power 'to prescribe the rule by which commerce is to
be governed'. Gibbons v. Ogden, 9 Wheat. 1, 196, 6 L.Ed. 23. It extends not
only to those regulations which aid, foster and protect the commerce, but
embraces those which prohibit it. Reid v. Colorado, 187 U.S. 137, 23 S.Ct. 92,
47 L.Ed. 108; Lottery Case (Champion v. Ames), 188 U.S. 321, 23 S.Ct. 321, 47
L.Ed. 492; United States v. Delaware & Hudson Co., 213 U.S. 366, 29 S.Ct. 527,
53 L.Ed. 836; Hoke v. United States, 227 U.S. 308, 33 S.Ct. 281, 57 L.Ed. 523,
43 L.R.A.,N.S., 906, Ann.Cas.1913E, 905; Clark Distilling Co. v. Western
Maryland R. Co., 242 U.S. 311, 37 S.Ct. 180, 61 L.Ed. 326, L.R.A.1917B, 1218,
Ann.Cas.1917B, 845; United States v. Hill, 248 U.S. 420, 39 S.Ct. 143, 63
L.Ed. 337; McCormick & Co. v. Brown, 286 U.S. 131, 52 S.Ct. 522, 76 L.Ed.
1017, 87 A.L.R. 448. It is conceded that the power of Congress to prohibit
transportation in interstate commerce includes noxious articles, Lottery Case,
supra; Hipolite Egg Co. v. United States, 220 U.S. 45, 31 S.Ct. 364, 55 L.Ed.
364; cf. Hoke v. United States, supra; stolen articles, Brooks v. United
States, 267 U.S. 432, 45 S.Ct. 345, 69 L.Ed. 699, 37 A.L.R. 1407; Kidnapped
persons, Gooch v. United States, 297 U.S. 124, 56 S.Ct. 395, 80 L.Ed. 522, and
articles such as intoxicating liquor or convict made goods, traffic in which
is forbidden or restricted by the laws of the state of destination. Kentucky
Whip & Collar Co. v. Illinois Central R. Co., 299 U.S. 334, 57 S.Ct. 277, 81
L.Ed. 270.

12

But it is said that the present prohibition falls within the scope of none of
these categories; that while the prohibition is nominally a regulation of the
commerce its motive or purpose is regulation of wages and hours of persons
engaged in manufacture, the control of which has been reserved to the states
and upon which Georgia and some of the states of destination have placed no
restriction; that the effect of the present statute is not to exclude the
prescribed articles from interstate commerce in aid of state regulation as in
Kentucky Whip & Collar Co. v. Illinois Central R. Co., supra, but instead,
under the guise of a regulation of interstate commerce, it undertakes to
regulate wages and hours within the state contrary to the policy of the state
which has elected to leave them unregulated.

13

The power of Congress over interstate commerce 'is complete in itself, may be
exercised to its utmost extent, and acknowledges no limitations, other than
are prescribed by the constitution.' Gibbons v. Ogden, supra, 9 Wheat. 196, 6
L.Ed. 23. That power can neither be enlarged nor diminished by the exercise or
non-exercise of state power. Kentucky Whip & Collar Co. v. Illinois Central R.
Co., supra. Congress, following its own conception of public policy concerning
the restrictions which may appropriately be imposed on interstate commerce, is
free to exclude from the commerce articles whose use in the states for which
they are destined it may conceive to be injurious to the public health, morals
or welfare, even though the state has not sought to regulate their use. Reid
v. Colorado, supra; Lottery Case, supra; Hipolite Egg Co. v. United States,
supra; Hoke v. United States, supra.

14

Such regulation is not a forbidden invasion of state power merely because
either its motive or its consequence is to restrict the use of articles of
commerce within the states of destination and is not prohibited unless by
other Constitutional provisions. It is no objection to the assertion of the
power to regulate interstate commerce that its exercise is attended by the
same incidents which attend the exercise of the police power of the states.
Seven Cases v. United States, 239 U.S. 510, 514, 36 S.Ct. 190, 191, 60 L.Ed.
411; Hamilton v. Kentucky Distilleries & Warehouse Co., 251 U.S. 146, 156, 40
S.Ct. 106, 108, 64 L.Ed. 194; United States v. Carolene Products Co., 304 U.S.
144, 147, 58 S.Ct. 778, 780, 82 L.Ed. 1234; United States v. Appalachian
Electric Power Co., 311 U.S. 377, 61 S.Ct. 291, 85 L.Ed. 243, decided December
16, 1940.

15

The motive and purpose of the present regulation are plainly to make effective
the Congressional conception of public policy that interstate commerce should
not be made the instrument of competition in the distribution of goods
produced under substandard labor conditions, which competition is injurious to
the commerce and to the states from and to which the commerce flows. The
motive and purpose of a regulation of interstate commerce are matters for the
legislative judgment upon the exercise of which the Constitution places no
restriction and over which the courts are given no control. McCray v. United
States, 195 U.S. 27, 24 S.Ct. 769, 49 L.Ed. 78, 1 Ann.Cas. 561; Sonzinsky v.
United States, 300 U.S. 506, 513, 57 S.Ct. 554, 555, 81 L.Ed. 772, and cases
cited. 'The judicial cannot prescribe to the legislative departments of the
government limitations upon the exercise of its acknowledged power'. Veazie
Bank v. Fenno, 8 Wall. 533, 548, 19 L.Ed. 482. Whatever their motive and
purpose, regulations of commerce which do not infringe some constitutional
prohibition are within the plenary power conferred on Congress by the Commerce
Clause. Subject only to that limitation, presently to be considered, we
conclude that the prohibition of the shipment interstate of goods produced
under the forbidden substandard labor conditions is within the constitutional
authority of Congress.

16

In the more than a century which has elapsed since the decision of Gibbons v.
Ogden, these principles of constitutional interpretation have been so long and
repeatedly recognized by this Court as applicable to the Commerce Clause, that
there would be little occasion for repeating them now were it not for the
decision of this Court twenty-two years ago in Hammer v. Dagenhart, 247 U.S.
251, 38 S.Ct. 529, 62 L.Ed. 1101, 3 A.L.R. 649, Ann.Cas.1918E, 724. In that
case it was held by a bare majority of the Court over the powerful and now
classic dissent of Mr. Justice Holmes setting forth the fundamental issues
involved, that Congress was without power to exclude the products of child
labor from interstate commerce. The reasoning and conclusion of the Court's
opinion there cannot be reconciled with the conclusion which we have reached,
that the power of Congress under the Commerce Clause is plenary to exclude any
article from interstate commerce subject only to the specific prohibitions of
the Constitution.

17

Hammer v. Dagenhart has not been followed. The distinction on which the
decision was rested that Congressional power to prohibit interstate commerce
is limited to articles which in themselves have some harmful or deleterious
property--a distinction which was novel when made and unsupported by any
provision of the Constitution--has long since been abandoned. Brooks v. United
States, supra; Kentucky Whip & Collar Co. v. Illinois Central R. Co., supra;
Electric Bond & Share Co. v. Securities & Exchange Commission, 303 U.S. 419,
58 S.Ct. 678, 82 L.Ed. 936, 115 A.L.R. 105; Mulford v. Smith, 307 U.S. 38, 59
S.Ct. 648, 83 L.Ed. 1092. The thesis of the opinion that the motive of the
prohibition or its effect to control in some measure the use or production
within the states of the article thus excluded from the commerce can operate
to deprive the regulation of its constitutional authority has long since
ceased to have force. Reid v. Colorado, supra; Lottery Case, supra; Hipolite
Egg Co. v. United States, supra; Seven Cases v. United States, supra, 239 U.S.
514, 36 S.Ct. 191, 60 L.Ed. 411; Hamilton v. Kentucky Distilleries & Warehouse
Co., supra, 251 U.S. 156, 40 S.Ct. 108, 64 L.Ed. 194; United States v.
Carolene Products Co., supra, 304 U.S. 147, 58 S.Ct. 780, 82 L.Ed. 1234. And
finally we have declared 'The authority of the Federal Government over
interstate commerce does not differ in extent or character from that retained
by the states over intrastate commerce'. United States v. Rock Royal Co-
Operative, Inc., 307 U.S. 533, 569, 59 S.Ct. 993, 1011, 83 L.Ed. 1446.

18

The conclusion is inescapable that Hammer v. Dagenhart, was a departure from
the principles which have prevailed in the interpretation of the commerce
clause both before and since the decision and that such vitality, as a
precedent, as it then had has long since been exhausted. It should be and now
is overruled.

19

Validity of the wage and hour requirements. Section 15(a)(2) and §§ 6 and 7
require employers to conform to the wage and hour provisions with respect to
all employees engaged in the production of goods for interstate commerce. As
appellee's employees are not alleged to be 'engaged in interstate commerce'
the validity of the prohibition turns on the question whether the employment,
under other than the prescribed labor standards, of employees engaged in the
production of goods for interstate commerce is so related to the commerce and
so affects it as to be within the reach of the power of Congress to regulate
it.

20

To answer this question we must at the outset determine whether the particular
acts charged in the counts which are laid under § 15(a)(2) as they were
construed below, constitute 'production for commerce' within the meaning of
the statute. As the Government seeks to apply the statute in the indictment,
and as the court below construed the phrase 'produced for interstate
commerce', it embraces at least the case where an employer engaged, as are
appellees, in the manufacture and shipment of goods in filling orders of
extrastate customers, manufactures his product with the intent or expectation
that according to the normal course of his business all or some part of it
will be selected for shipment to those customers.

21

Without attempting to define the precise limits of the phrase, we think the
acts alleged in the indictment are within the sweep of the statute. The
obvious purpose of the Act was not only to prevent the interstate
transportation of the proscribed product, but to stop the initial step toward
transportation, production with the purpose of so transporting it. Congress
was not unaware that most manufacturing businesses shipping their product in
interstate commerce make it in their shops without reference to its ultimate
destination and then after manufacture select some of it for shipment
interstate and some intrastate according to the daily demands of their
business, and that it would be practically impossible, without disrupting
manufacturing businesses, to restrict the prohibited kind of production to the
particular pieces of lumber, cloth, furniture or the like which later move in
interstate rather than intrastate commerce. Cf. United States v. New York
Central R. Co., 272 U.S. 457, 464, 47 S.Ct. 130, 132, 71 L.Ed. 350.

22

The recognized need of drafting a workable statute and the well known
circumstances in which it was to be applied are persuasive of the conclusion,
which the legislative history supports, S.Rept.No. 884 75th Cong.1st Sess.,
pp. 7 and 8; H.Rept.No. 2738, 75th Cong.3d Sess., p. 17, that the 'production
for commerce' intended includes at least production of goods, which, at the
time of production, the employer, according to the normal course of his
business, intends or expects to move in interstate commerce although, through
the exigencies of the business, all of the goods may not thereafter actually
enter interstate commerce.2

23

There remains the question whether such restriction on the production of goods
for commerce is a permissible exercise of the commerce power. The power of
Congress over interstate commerce is not confined to the regulation of
commerce among the states. It extends to those activities intrastate which so
affect interstate commerce or the exercise of the power of Congress over it as
to make regulation of them appropriate means to the attainment of a legitimate
end, the exercise of the granted power of Congress to regulate interstate
commerce. See McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 421, 4 L.Ed. 579. Cf.
United States v. Ferger, 250 U.S. 199, 39 S.Ct. 445, 63 L.Ed. 936.

24

While this Court has many times found state regulation of interstate commerce,
when uniformity of its regulation is of national concern, to be incompatible
with the Commerce Clause even though Congress has not legislated on the
subject, the Court has never implied such restraint on state control over
matters intrastate not deemed to be regulations of interstate commerce or its
instrumentalities even though they affect the commerce. Minnesota Rate Cases,
230 U.S. 352, 398, 410 et seq., 33 S.Ct. 729, 739, 744, 57 L.Ed. 1511, 48
L.R.A.,N.S., 1151, Ann.Cas.1916A, 18, and cases cited. In the absence of
Congressional legislation on the subject state laws which are not regulations
of the commerce itself or its instrumentalities are not forbidden even though
they affect interstate commerce. Kidd v. Pearson, 128 U.S. 1, 9 S.Ct. 6, 32
L.Ed. 346; Bacon v. Illinois, 227 U.S. 504, 33 S.Ct. 299, 57 L.Ed. 615;
Heisler v. Thomas Colliery Co., 260 U.S. 245, 43 S.Ct. 83, 67 L.Ed. 237;
Oliver Iron Mining Co. v. Lord, 262 U.S. 172, 43 S.Ct. 526, 67 L.Ed. 929.

25

But it does not follow that Congress may not by appropriate legislation
regulate intrastate activities where they have a substantial effect on
interstate commerce. See Santa Cruz Fruit Packing Co. v. National Labor
Relations Board, 303 U.S. 453, 466, 58 S.Ct. 656, 660, 82 L.Ed. 954. A recent
example is the National Labor Relations Act, 29 U.S.C.A. § 151 et seq., for
the regulation of employer and employee relations in industries in which
strikes, induced by unfair labor practices named in the Act, tend to disturb
or obstruct interstate commerce. See National Labor Relations Board v. Jones &
Laughlin Steel Corp., 301 U.S. 1, 38, 40, 57 S.Ct. 615, 625, 81 L.Ed. 893, 108
A.L.R. 1352; National Labor Relations Board v. Fainblatt, 306 U.S. 601, 604,
59 S.Ct. 668, 670, 83 L.Ed. 1014, and cases cited. But long before the
adoption of the National Labor Relations Act, this Court had many times held
that the power of Congress to regulate interstate commerce extends to the
regulation through legislative action of activities intrastate which have a
substantial effect on the commerce or the exercise of the Congressional power
over it.3

26

In such legislation Congress has sometimes left it to the courts to determine
whether the intrastate activities have the prohibited effect on the commerce,
as in the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C.A. §§ 1--7, 15 note. It has sometimes left it
to an administrative board or agency to determine whether the activities
sought to be regulated or prohibited have such effect, as in the case of the
Interstate Commerce Act, 49 U.S.C.A. § 1 et seq., and the National Labor
Relations Act or whether they come within the statutory definition of the
prohibited Act as in the Federal Trade Commission Act, 15 U.S.C.A. § 41 et
seq. And sometimes Congress itself has said that a particular activity affects
the commerce as it did in the present act, the Safety Appliance Act, 15
U.S.C.A. § 1 et seq., and the Railway Labor Act, 45 U.S.C.A. § 181 et seq. In
passing on the validity of legislation of the class last mentioned the only
function of courts is to determine whether the particular activity regulated
or prohibited is within the reach of the federal power. See United States v.
Ferger, supra; Virginian R. Co. v. System Federation, 300 U.S. 515, 553, 57
S.Ct. 592, 602, 81 L.Ed. 789.

27

Congress, having by the present Act adopted the policy of excluding from
interstate commerce all goods produced for the commerce which do not conform
to the specified labor standards, it may choose the means reasonably adapted
to the attainment of the permitted end, even though they involve control of
intrastate activities. Such legislation has often been sustained with respect
to powers, other than the commerce power granted to the national government,
when the means chosen, although not themselves within the granted power, were
nevertheless deemed appropriate aids to the accomplishment of some purpose
within an admitted power of the national government. See Ruppert, Inc., v.
Caffey, 251 U.S. 264, 40 S.Ct. 141, 64 L.Ed. 260; Everard's Breweries v. Day,
265 U.S. 545, 560, 44 S.Ct. 628, 631, 68 L.Ed. 1174; Westfall v. United
States, 274 U.S. 256, 259, 47 S.Ct. 629, 71 L.Ed. 1036. As to state power
under the Fourteenth Amendment, compare Otis v. Parker, 187 U.S. 606, 609, 23
S.Ct. 168, 47 L.Ed. 323; St. John v. New York, 201 U.S. 633, 26 S.Ct. 554, 50
L.Ed. 896, 5 Ann.Cas. 909; Purity Extract & Tonic Company v. Lynch, 226 U.S.
192, 201, 202, 33 S.Ct. 44, 45, 46, 57 L.Ed. 184. A familiar like exercise of
power is the regulation of intrastate transactions which are so commingled
with or related to interstate commerce that all must be regulated if the
interstate commerce is to be effectively controlled. Shreveport Case, 234 U.S.
342, 34 S.Ct. 833, 58 L.Ed. 1341; Wisconsin Railroad Comm. v. Chicago, B. &
Q.R. Co., 257 U.S. 563, 42 S.Ct. 232, 66 L.Ed. 371, 22 A.L.R. 1086; United
States v. New York Central R.R. Co., supra, 272 U.S. 464, 47 S.Ct. 132, 71
L.Ed. 350; Currin v. Wallace, 306 U.S. 1, 59 S.Ct. 379, 83 L.Ed. 441; Mulford
v. Smith, supra. Similarly Congress may require inspection and preventive
treatment of all cattle in a disease infected area in order to prevent
shipment in interstate commerce of some of the cattle without the treatment.
Thornton v. United States, 271 U.S. 414, 46 S.Ct. 585, 70 L.Ed. 1013. It may
prohibit the removal, at destination, of labels required by the Pure Food &
Drugs Act, 21 U.S.C.A. § 1 et seq., to be affixed to articles transported in
interstate commerce. McDermott v. wisconsin, 228 U.S. 115, 33 S.Ct. 431, 57
L.Ed. 754, 47 L.R.A.,N.S., 984, Ann.Cas.1915A, 39. And we have recently held
that Congress in the exercise of its power to require inspection and grading
of tobacco shipped in interstate commerce may compel such inspection and
grading of all tobacco sold at local auction rooms from which a substantial
part but not all of the tobacco sold is shipped in interstate commerce. Currin
v. Wallace, supra, 306 U.S. 11, 59 S.Ct. 385, 83 L.Ed. 441, and see to the
like effect United States v. Rock Royal Co-Op., supra, 307 U.S. 568, 59 S.Ct.
1010, 83 L.Ed. 1446, note 37.

28

We think also that § 15[a][2], now under consideration, is sustainable
independently of § 15(a)(1), which prohibits shipment or transportation of the
proscribed goods. As we have said the evils aimed at by the Act are the spread
of substandard labor conditions through the use of the facilities of
interstate commerce for competition by the goods so produced with those
produced under the prescribed or better labor conditions; and the consequent
dislocation of the commerce itself caused by the impairment or destruction of
local businesses by competition made effective through interstate commerce.
The Act is thus directed at the suppression of a method or kind of competition
in interstate commerce which it has in effect condemned as 'unfair', as the
Clayton Act, 38 Stat. 730, has condemned other 'unfair methods of competition'
made effective through interstate commerce. See Van Camp & Sons v. American
Can Co., 278 U.S. 245, 49 S.Ct. 112, 73 L.Ed. 311, 60 A.L.R. 1060; Federal
Trade Comm. v. R. F. Keppel & Bro., 291 U.S. 304, 54 S.Ct. 423, 78 L.Ed. 814.

29

The Sherman Act and the National Labor Relations Act are familiar examples of
the exertion of the commerce power to prohibit or control activities wholly
intrastate because of their effect on interstate commerce. See as to the
Sherman Act, Northern Securities Company v. United States, 193 U.S. 197, 24
S.Ct. 436, 48 L.Ed. 679; Swift & Co. v. United States, 196 U.S. 375, 25 S.Ct.
276, 49 L.Ed. 518; United States v. Patten, 226 U.S. 525, 33 S.Ct. 141, 57
L.Ed. 333, 44 L.R.A.,N.S., 325; United Mine Workers v. Coronado Coal Co., 259
U.S. 344, 42 S.Ct. 570, 66 L.Ed. 975, 27 A.L.R. 762; Local 167 v. United
States, 291 U.S. 293, 54 S.Ct. 396, 78 L.Ed. 804; Stevens Co. et al. v. Foster
& Kleiser Co. et al., 311 U.S. 255, 61 S.Ct. 210, 85 L.Ed. 173, decided
December 9, 1940. As to the National Labor Relations Act, see National Labor
Relations Board v. Fainblatt, supra, and cases cited.

30

The means adopted by § 15(a)(2) for the protection of interstate commerce by
the suppression of the production of the condemned goods for interstate
commerce is so related to the commerce and so affects it as to be within the
reach of the commerce power. See Currin v. Wallace, supra, 306 U.S. 11, 59
S.Ct. 385, 83 L.Ed. 441. Congress, to attain its objective in the suppression
of nationwide competition in interstate commerce by goods produced under
substandard labor conditions, has made no distinction as to the volume or
amount of shipments in the commerce or of production for commerce by any
particular shipper or producer. It recognized that in present day industry,
competition by a small part may affect the whole and that the total effect of
the competition of many small producers may be great. See H. Rept. No. 2182,
75th Cong. 1st Sess., p. 7. The legislation aimed at a whole embraces all its
parts. Cf. National Labor Relations Board v. Fainblatt, supra, 306 U.S. 606,
59 S.Ct. 671, 83 L.Ed. 1014.

31

So far as Carter v. Carter Coal Co., 298 U.S. 238, 56 S.Ct. 855, 80 L.Ed.
1160, is inconsistent with this conclusion, its doctrine is limited in
principle by the decisions under the Sherman Act and the National Labor
Relations Act, which we have cited and which we follow. See, also, Sunshine
Anthracite Coal Co. v. Adkins, 310 U.S. 381, 60 S.Ct. 907, 84 L.Ed. 1263;
Currin v. Wallace, supra; Mulford v. Smith, supra; United States v. Rock Royal
Co-Op., supra; Clover Fork Coal Co. v. National Labor Relations Board, 6 Cir.,
97 F.2d 331; National Labor Relations Board v. Crowe Coal Co., 8 Cir., 104
F.2d 633; National Labor Relations Board v. Good Coal Co., 6 Cir., 110 F.2d
501.

32

Our conclusion is unaffected by the Tenth Amendment which provides: 'The
powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited
by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the
people'. The amendment states but a truism that all is retained which has not
been surrendered. There is nothing in the history of its adoption to suggest
that it was more than declaratory of the relationship between the national and
state governments as it had been established by the Constitution before the
amendment or that its purpose was other than to allay fears that the new
national government might seek to exercise powers not granted, and that the
states might not be able to exercise fully their reserved powers. See e.g., II
Elliot's Debates, 123, 131; III id. 450, 464, 600; IV id. 140, 149; I Annals
of Congress, 432, 761, 767-768; Story, Commentaries on the Constitution, secs.
1907, 1908.

33

From the beginning and for many years the amendment has been construed as not
depriving the national government of authority to resort to all means for the
exercise of a granted power which are appropriate and plainly adapted to the
permitted end. Martin v. Hunter's Lessee, 1 Wheat. 304, 324, 325, 4 L.Ed. 97;
McCulloch v. Maryland, supra, 4 Wheat. 405, 406, 4 L.Ed. 579; Gordon v. United
States, 117 U.S. Appendix, 697, 705; Lottery Case, supra; Northern Securities
Co. v. United States, supra, 193 U.S. 344, 345, 24 S.Ct. 459, 460, 48 L.Ed.
679; Everard's Breweries v. Day, supra, 265 U.S. 558, 44 S.Ct. 631, 68 L.Ed.
1174; United States v. Sprague, 282 U.S. 716, 733, 51 S.Ct. 220, 222, 75 L.Ed.
640, 71 A.L.R. 1381; see United States v. The Brigantine William, 28 Fed.Cas.
614, 622, No. 16,700. Whatever doubts may have arisen of the soundness of that
conclusion they have been put at rest by the decisions under the Sherman Act
and the National Labor Relations Act which we have cited. See, also, Ashwander
v. Tennessee Valley Authority, 297 U.S. 288, 330, 331, 56 S.Ct. 466, 475, 80
L.Ed. 688; Wright v. Union Central Ins. Co., 304 U.S. 502, 516, 58 S.Ct. 1025,
1033, 82 L.Ed. 1490.

34

Validity of the requirement of records of wages and hours. § 15(a)(5) and §
11(c). These requirements are incidental to those for the prescribed wages and
hours, and hence validity of the former turns on validity of the latter.
Since, as we have held, Congress may require production for interstate
Commerce to conform to those conditions, it may require the employer, as a
means of enforcing the valid law, to keep a record showing whether he has in
fact complied with it. The requirement for records even of the intrastate
transaction is an appropriate means to the legitimate end. See Baltimore &
Ohio R. Co. v. Interstate Commerce Commission, 221 U.S. 612, 31 S.Ct. 621, 55
L.Ed. 878; Interstate Commerce Commission v. Goodrich Transit Co., 224 U.S.
194, 32 S.Ct. 436, 56 L.Ed. 729; Chicago Board of Trade v. Olsen, 262 U.S. 1,
42, 43 S.Ct. 470, 479, 67 L.Ed. 839.

35

Validity of the wage and hour provisions under the Fifth Amendment. Both
provisions are minimum wage requirements compelling the payment of a minimum
standard wage with a prescribed increased wage for overtime of 'not less than
one and one-half times the regular rate' at which the worker is employed.
Since our decision in West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish, 300 U.S. 379, 57 S.Ct.
578, 81 L.Ed. 703, 108 A.L.R. 1330, it is no longer open to question that the
fixing of a minimum wage is within the legislative power and that the bare
fact of its exercise is not a denial of due process under the Fifth more than
under the Fourteenth Amendment. Nor is it any longer open to question that it
is within the legislative power to fix maximum hours. Holden v. Hardy, 169
U.S. 366, 18 S.Ct. 383, 42 L.Ed. 780; Muller v. Oregon, 208 U.S. 412, 28 S.Ct.
324, 52 L.Ed. 551, 13 Ann.Cas. 957; Bunting v. Oregon, infra; Baltimore & Ohio
R. Co. v. Interstate Commerce Commission, supra. Similarly the statute is not
objectionable because applied alike to both men and women. Cf. Bunting v.
Oregon, 243 U.S. 426, 37 S.Ct. 435, 61 L.Ed. 830, Ann.Cas.1918A, 1043.

36

The Act is sufficiently definite to meet constitutional demands. One who
employs persons, without conforming to the prescribed wage and hour
conditions, to work on goods which he ships or expects to ship across state
lines, is warned that he may be subject to the criminal penalties of the Act.
No more is required. Nash v. United States, 229 U.S. 373, 377, 33 S.Ct. 780,
781, 57 L.Ed. 1232.

37

We have considered, but find it unnecessary to discuss other contentions.

38

Reversed.

1

'Sec. 2 (§ 202). (a) The Congress hereby finds that the existence, in
industries engaged in commerce or in the production of goods for commerce, of
labor conditions detrimental to the maintenance of the minimum standard of
living necessary for health, efficiency, and general well-being of workers (1)
causes commerce and the channels and instrumentalities of commerce to be used
to spread and perpetuate such labor conditions among the workers of the
several States; (2) burdens commerce and the free flow of goods in commerce;
(3) constitutes an unfair method of competition in commerce; (4) leads to
labor disputes burdening and obstructing commerce and the free flow of goods
in commerce; and (5) interferes with the orderly and fair marketing of goods
in commerce.'

Section 3(b) defines 'commerce' as 'trade, commerce, transportation,
transmission, or communication among the several States or from any State to
any place outside thereof.'

2

Cf. Administrator's Opinion, Interpretative Bulletin No. 5, 1940 Wage and Hour
Manual, p. 131 et seq.

3

It may prohibit wholly intrastate activities which, if permitted, would result
in restraint of interstate commerce. Coronado Coal Co. v. United Mine Workers,
268 U.S. 295, 310, 45 S.Ct. 551, 556, 69 L.Ed. 963; Local 167 v. United
States, 291 U.S. 293, 297, 54 S.Ct. 396, 398, 78 L.Ed. 804. It may regulate
the activities of a local grain exchange shown to have an injurious effect on
interstate commerce. Chicago Board of Trade v. Olsen, 262 U.S. 1, 43 S.Ct.
470, 67 L.Ed. 839. It may regulate intrastate rates of interstate carriers
where the effect of the rates is to burden interstate commerce. Houston, E. &
W. Texas R. Co. v. United States, 234 U.S. 342, 34 S.Ct. 833, 58 L.Ed. 1341;
Railroad Commission of Wisconsin v. Chicago, Burlington & Quincy R. Co., 257
U.S. 563, 42 S.Ct. 232, 66 L.Ed. 371, 22 A.L.R. 1086; United States v.
Louisiana, 290 U.S. 70, 74, 54 S.Ct. 28, 31, 78 L.Ed. 181; Florida v. United
States, 292 U.S. 1, 54 S.Ct. 603, 78 L.Ed. 1077. It may compel the adoption of
safety appliances on rolling stock moving intrastate because of the relation
to and effect of such appliances upon interstate traffic moving over the same
railroad. Southern R. Co. v. United States, 222 U.S. 20, 32 S.Ct. 2, 56 L.Ed.
72. It may prescribe maximum hours for employees engaged in intrastate
activity connected with the movement of any train, such as train dispatchers
and telegraphers. Baltimore & Ohio R. Co. v. Interstate Commerce Commission,
221 U.S. 612, 619, 31 S.Ct. 621, 625, 55 L.Ed. 878.

