**129 S.Ct. 1187 (2009)**

# WYETH, Petitioner,  
v.  
Diana LEVINE.

No. 06-1249.

**Supreme Court of United States.**

Argued November 3, 2008. Decided March 4, 2009.

*1190 Edwin S. Kneedler for the United States as amicus curiae, by special leave of the Court, supporting petitioner.

David C. Frederick, for respondent.

Bert W. Rein, Karyn K. Ablin, Brendan J. Morrissey, Wiley Rein LLP,
Washington, DC, Allan R. Keyes, R. Joseph O'Rourke, Ryan, Smith, Carbine,
Ltd., Rutland, VT, Seth P. Waxman, Counsel of Record, Paul R.Q. Wolfson,
Catherine M.A. Carroll, Margaret Williams, Smith Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale
and Dorr LLP, Washington, DC, William J. Ruane, Wyeth, Madison, NJ, for
petitioner.

Richard I. Rubin, Rubin, Kidney, Myer & DeWolfe, Barre, Vermont, David C.
Frederick, Counsel of Record, Scott H. Angstreich, Scott K. Attaway, Brendan
J. Crimmins, Kellogg, Huber, Hansen, Todd, Evans & Figel, P.L.L.C.,
Washington, D.C., for respondent.

For U.S. Supreme Court Briefs, see:

2008 WL 2273067 (Pet.Brief)

2008 WL 3285388 (Resp.Brief)

2008 WL 4264481 (Reply.Brief)

Justice STEVENS delivered the opinion of the Court.

Directly injecting the drug Phenergan into a patient's vein creates a
significant risk of catastrophic consequences. A Vermont *1191 jury found that
petitioner Wyeth, the manufacturer of the drug, had failed to provide an
adequate warning of that risk and awarded damages to respondent Diana Levine
to compensate her for the amputation of her arm. The warnings on Phenergan's
label had been deemed sufficient by the federal Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) when it approved Wyeth's new drug application in 1955 and when it later
approved changes in the drug's labeling. The question we must decide is
whether the FDA's approvals provide Wyeth with a complete defense to Levine's
tort claims. We conclude that they do not.

## I

Phenergan is Wyeth's brand name for promethazine hydrochloride, an
antihistamine used to treat nausea. The injectable form of Phenergan can be
administered intramuscularly or intravenously, and it can be administered
intravenously through either the "IV-push" method, whereby the drug is
injected directly into a patient's vein, or the "IV-drip" method, whereby the
drug is introduced into a saline solution in a hanging intravenous bag and
slowly descends through a catheter inserted in a patient's vein. The drug is
corrosive and causes irreversible gangrene if it enters a patient's artery.

Levine's injury resulted from an IV-push injection of Phenergan. On April 7,
2000, as on previous visits to her local clinic for treatment of a migraine
headache, she received an intramuscular injection of Demerol for her headache
and Phenergan for her nausea. Because the combination did not provide relief,
she returned later that day and received a second injection of both drugs.
This time, the physician assistant administered the drugs by the IV-push
method, and Phenergan entered Levine's artery, either because the needle
penetrated an artery directly or because the drug escaped from the vein into
surrounding tissue (a phenomenon called "perivascular extravasation") where it
came in contact with arterial blood. As a result, Levine developed gangrene,
and doctors amputated first her right hand and then her entire forearm. In
addition to her pain and suffering, Levine incurred substantial medical
expenses and the loss of her livelihood as a professional musician.

After settling claims against the health center and clinician, Levine brought
an action for damages against Wyeth, relying on common-law negligence and
strict-liability theories. Although Phenergan's labeling warned of the danger
of gangrene and amputation following inadvertent intra-arterial injection,[1]
Levine alleged that *1192 the labeling was defective because it failed to
instruct clinicians to use the IV-drip method of intravenous administration
instead of the higher risk IV-push method. More broadly, she alleged that
Phenergan is not reasonably safe for intravenous administration because the
foreseeable risks of gangrene and loss of limb are great in relation to the
drug's therapeutic benefits. App. 14-15.

Wyeth filed a motion for summary judgment, arguing that Levine's failure-to-
warn claims were pre-empted by federal law. The court found no merit in either
Wyeth's field pre-emption argument, which it has since abandoned, or its
conflict pre-emption argument. With respect to the contention that there was
an "actual conflict between a specific FDA order," _id.,_ at 21, and Levine's
failure-to-warn action, the court reviewed the sparse correspondence between
Wyeth and the FDA about Phenergan's labeling and found no evidence that Wyeth
had "earnestly attempted" to strengthen the intra-arterial injection warning
or that the FDA had "specifically disallowed" stronger language, _id.,_ at 23.
The record, as then developed, "lack[ed] any evidence that the FDA set a
ceiling on this matter." _Ibid._

The evidence presented during the 5-day jury trial showed that the risk of
intra-arterial injection or perivascular extravasation can be almost entirely
eliminated through the use of IV-drip, rather than IV-push, administration. An
IV drip is started with saline, which will not flow properly if the catheter
is not in the vein and fluid is entering an artery or surrounding tissue. See
_id.,_ at 50-51, 60, 66-68, 75. By contrast, even a careful and experienced
clinician using the IV-push method will occasionally expose an artery to
Phenergan. See _id.,_ at 73, 75-76. While Phenergan's labeling warned against
intra-arterial injection and perivascular extravasation and advised that
"[w]hen administering any irritant drug intravenously it is usually preferable
to inject it through the tubing of an intravenous infusion set that is known
to be functioning satisfactorily," _id.,_ at 390, the labeling did not contain
a specific warning about the risks of IV-push administration.

The trial record also contains correspondence between Wyeth and the FDA
discussing Phenergan's label. The FDA first approved injectable Phenergan in
1955. In 1973 and 1976, Wyeth submitted supplemental new drug applications,
which the agency approved after proposing labeling changes. Wyeth submitted a
third supplemental application in 1981 in response to a new FDA rule governing
drug labels. Over the next 17 years, Wyeth and the FDA intermittently
corresponded about Phenergan's label. The most notable activity occurred in
1987, when the FDA suggested different warnings about the risk of arterial
exposure, and in 1988, when Wyeth submitted revised labeling incorporating the
proposed changes. The FDA did not respond. Instead, in 1996, it requested from
Wyeth the labeling then in use and, without addressing Wyeth's 1988
submission, instructed it to "[r]etain verbiage in current label" regarding
intra-arterial injection. _Id.,_ at 359. After a few further changes to the
labeling not related to intra-arterial injection, the FDA approved Wyeth's
1981 application in 1998, instructing that Phenergan's final printed label
"must be identical" to the approved package insert. _Id.,_ at 382.

Based on this regulatory history, the trial judge instructed the jury that it
could *1193 consider evidence of Wyeth's compliance with FDA requirements but
that such compliance did not establish that the warnings were adequate. He
also instructed, without objection from Wyeth, that FDA regulations "permit a
drug manufacturer to change a product label to add or strengthen a warning
about its product without prior FDA approval so long as it later submits the
revised warning for review and approval." _Id.,_ at 228.

Answering questions on a special verdict form, the jury found that Wyeth was
negligent, that Phenergan was a defective product as a result of inadequate
warnings and instructions, and that no intervening cause had broken the causal
connection between the product defects and the plaintiff's injury. _Id.,_ at
233-235. It awarded total damages of $7,400,000, which the court reduced to
account for Levine's earlier settlement with the health center and clinician.
_Id.,_ at 235-236.

On August 3, 2004, the trial court filed a comprehensive opinion denying
Wyeth's motion for judgment as a matter of law. After making findings of fact
based on the trial record (supplemented by one letter that Wyeth found after
the trial), the court rejected Wyeth's pre-emption arguments. It determined
that there was no direct conflict between FDA regulations and Levine's state-
law claims because those regulations permit strengthened warnings without FDA
approval on an interim basis and the record contained evidence of at least 20
reports of amputations similar to Levine's since the 1960's. The court also
found that state tort liability in this case would not obstruct the FDA's work
because the agency had paid no more than passing attention to the question
whether to warn against IV-push administration of Phenergan. In addition, the
court noted that state law serves a compensatory function distinct from
federal regulation. _Id.,_ at 249-252.

The Vermont Supreme Court affirmed. It held that the jury's verdict "did not
conflict with FDA's labeling requirements for Phenergan because [Wyeth] could
have warned against IV-push administration without prior FDA approval, and
because federal labeling requirements create a floor, not a ceiling, for state
regulation." ___ Vt. ___, ___, 944 A.2d 179, 184 (2006). In dissent, Chief
Justice Reiber argued that the jury's verdict conflicted with federal law
because it was inconsistent with the FDA's conclusion that intravenous
administration of Phenergan was safe and effective.

The importance of the pre-emption issue, coupled with the fact that the FDA
has changed its position on state tort law and now endorses the views
expressed in Chief Justice Reiber's dissent, persuaded us to grant Wyeth's
petition for certiorari. 552 U.S. ___, 128 S.Ct. 1118, 169 L.Ed.2d 845 (2008).
The question presented by the petition is whether the FDA's drug labeling
judgments "preempt state law product liability claims premised on the theory
that different labeling judgments were necessary to make drugs reasonably safe
for use." Pet. for Cert. _i._

## II

Wyeth makes two separate pre-emption arguments: first, that it would have been
impossible for it to comply with the state-law duty to modify Phenergan's
labeling without violating federal law, see _Fidelity Fed. Sav. & Loan Assn.
v. de la Cuesta,_ 458 U.S. 141, 153, 102 S.Ct. 3014, 73 L.Ed.2d 664 (1982),
and second, that recognition of Levine's state tort action creates an
unacceptable "obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full
purposes and objectives of Congress," _Hines v. Davidowitz,_ 312 U.S. 52, 67,
61 *1194 S.Ct. 399, 85 L.Ed. 581 (1941), because it substitutes a lay jury's
decision about drug labeling for the expert judgment of the FDA. As a preface
to our evaluation of these arguments, we identify two factual propositions
decided during the trial court proceedings, emphasize two legal principles
that guide our analysis, and review the history of the controlling federal
statute.

The trial court proceedings established that Levine's injury would not have
occurred if Phenergan's label had included an adequate warning about the risks
of the IV-push method of administering the drug. The record contains evidence
that the physician assistant administered a greater dose than the label
prescribed, that she may have inadvertently injected the drug into an artery
rather than a vein, and that she continued to inject the drug after Levine
complained of pain. Nevertheless, the jury rejected Wyeth's argument that the
clinician's conduct was an intervening cause that absolved it of liability.
See App. 234 (jury verdict), 252-254. In finding Wyeth negligent as well as
strictly liable, the jury also determined that Levine's injury was
foreseeable. That the inadequate label was both a but-for and proximate cause
of Levine's injury is supported by the record and no longer challenged by
Wyeth.[2]

The trial court proceedings further established that the critical defect in
Phenergan's label was the lack of an adequate warning about the risks of IV-
push administration. Levine also offered evidence that the IV-push method
should be contraindicated and that Phenergan should never be administered
intravenously, even by the IV-drip method. Perhaps for this reason, the
dissent incorrectly assumes that the state-law duty at issue is the duty to
contraindicate the IV-push method. See, _e.g., post,_ at 1221, 1230-1231. But,
as the Vermont Supreme Court explained, the jury verdict established only that
Phenergan's warning was insufficient. It did not mandate a particular
replacement warning, nor did it require contraindicating IV-push
administration: "There may have been any number of ways for [Wyeth] to
strengthen the Phenergan warning without completely eliminating IV-push
administration." ___ Vt., at ___, n. 2, 944 A.2d, at 189, n. 2. We therefore
need not decide whether a state rule proscribing intravenous administration
would be pre-empted. The narrower question presented is whether federal law
pre-empts Levine's claim that Phenergan's label did not contain an adequate
warning about using the IV-push method of administration.

Our answer to that question must be guided by two cornerstones of our pre-
emption jurisprudence. First, "the purpose of Congress is the ultimate
touchstone in every pre-emption case." _Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr,_ 518 U.S.
470, 485, 116 S.Ct. 2240, 135 L.Ed.2d 700 (1996) (internal quotation marks
omitted); see _Retail Clerks v. Schermerhorn,_ 375 U.S. 96, 103, 84 S.Ct. 219,
11 L.Ed.2d 179 (1963). Second, "[i]n all pre-emption cases, and particularly
in those in which Congress has `legislated... in a field which the States have
traditionally occupied,' ... we `start with the assumption that the historic
police *1195 powers of the States were not to be superseded by the Federal Act
unless that was the clear and manifest purpose of Congress.'" _Lohr,_ 518
U.S., at 485, 116 S.Ct. 2240 (quoting _Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp.,_ 331
U.S. 218, 230, 67 S.Ct. 1146, 91 L.Ed. 1447 (1947)).[3]

In order to identify the "purpose of Congress," it is appropriate to briefly
review the history of federal regulation of drugs and drug labeling. In 1906,
Congress enacted its first significant public health law, the Federal Food and
Drugs Act, ch. 3915, 34 Stat. 768. The Act, which prohibited the manufacture
or interstate shipment of adulterated or misbranded drugs, supplemented the
protection for consumers already provided by state regulation and common-law
liability. In the 1930's, Congress became increasingly concerned about unsafe
drugs and fraudulent marketing, and it enacted the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (FDCA), ch. 675, 52 Stat. 1040, as amended, 21 U.S.C. § 301 _et
seq._ The Act's most substantial innovation was its provision for premarket
approval of new drugs. It required every manufacturer to submit a new drug
application, including reports of investigations and specimens of proposed
labeling, to the FDA for review. Until its application became effective, a
manufacturer was prohibited from distributing a drug. The FDA could reject an
application if it determined that the drug was not safe for use as labeled,
though if the agency failed to act, an application became effective 60 days
after the filing. FDCA, § 505(c), 52 Stat. 1052.

In 1962, Congress amended the FDCA and shifted the burden of proof from the
FDA to the manufacturer. Before 1962, the agency had to prove harm to keep a
drug out of the market, but the amendments required the manufacturer to
demonstrate that its drug was "safe for use under the conditions prescribed,
recommended, or suggested in the proposed labeling" before it could distribute
the drug. §§ 102(d), 104(b), 76 Stat. 781, 784. In addition, the amendments
required the manufacturer to prove the drug's effectiveness by introducing
"substantial evidence that the drug will have the effect it purports or is
represented to have under the conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or
suggested in the proposed labeling." § 102(d), _id.,_ at 781.

As it enlarged the FDA's powers to "protect the public health" and "assure the
safety, effectiveness, and reliability of *1196 drugs," _id.,_ at 780,
Congress took care to preserve state law. The 1962 amendments added a saving
clause, indicating that a provision of state law would only be invalidated
upon a "direct and positive conflict" with the FDCA. § 202, _id.,_ at 793.
Consistent with that provision, state common-law suits "continued unabated
despite ... FDA regulation." _Riegel v. Medtronic, Inc.,_ 552 U.S. ___, ___,
128 S.Ct. 999, 1017, 169 L.Ed.2d 892 (2008) (GINSBURG, J., dissenting); see
_ibid.,_ n. 11 (collecting state cases). And when Congress enacted an express
pre-emption provision for medical devices in 1976, see § 521, 90 Stat. 574
(codified at 21 U.S.C. § 360k(a)), it declined to enact such a provision for
prescription drugs.

In 2007, after Levine's injury and lawsuit, Congress again amended the FDCA.
121 Stat. 823. For the first time, it granted the FDA statutory authority to
require a manufacturer to change its drug label based on safety information
that becomes available after a drug's initial approval. § 901(a), _id.,_ at
924-926. In doing so, however, Congress did not enact a provision in the
Senate bill that would have required the FDA to preapprove all changes to drug
labels. See S. 1082, 110th Cong., 1st Sess., § 208, pp. 107-114 (2007) (as
passed) (proposing new § 506D). Instead, it adopted a rule of construction to
make it clear that manufacturers remain responsible for updating their labels.
See 121 Stat. 925-926.

## III

Wyeth first argues that Levine's state-law claims are pre-empted because it is
impossible for it to comply with both the state-law duties underlying those
claims and its federal labeling duties. See _de la Cuesta,_ 458 U.S., at 153,
102 S.Ct. 3014. The FDA's premarket approval of a new drug application
includes the approval of the exact text in the proposed label. See 21 U.S.C. §
355; 21 CFR § 314.105(b) (2008). Generally speaking, a manufacturer may only
change a drug label after the FDA approves a supplemental application. There
is, however, an FDA regulation that permits a manufacturer to make certain
changes to its label before receiving the agency's approval. Among other
things, this "changes being effected" (CBE) regulation provides that if a
manufacturer is changing a label to "add or strengthen a contraindication,
warning, precaution, or adverse reaction" or to "add or strengthen an
instruction about dosage and administration that is intended to increase the
safe use of the drug product," it may make the labeling change upon filing its
supplemental application with the FDA; it need not wait for FDA approval. §§
314.70(c)(6)(iii)(A), (C).

Wyeth argues that the CBE regulation is not implicated in this case because a
2008 amendment provides that a manufacturer may only change its label "to
reflect newly acquired information." 73 Fed.Reg. 49609. Resting on this
language (which Wyeth argues simply reaffirmed the interpretation of the
regulation in effect when this case was tried), Wyeth contends that it could
have changed Phenergan's label only in response to new information that the
FDA had not considered. And it maintains that Levine has not pointed to any
such information concerning the risks of IV-push administration. Thus, Wyeth
insists, it was impossible for it to discharge its state-law obligation to
provide a stronger warning about IV-push administration without violating
federal law. Wyeth's argument misapprehends both the federal drug regulatory
scheme and its burden in establishing a pre-emption defense.

We need not decide whether the 2008 CBE regulation is consistent with the FDCA
and the previous version of the *1197 regulation, as Wyeth and the United
States urge, because Wyeth could have revised Phenergan's label even in
accordance with the amended regulation. As the FDA explained in its notice of
the final rule, "`newly acquired information'" is not limited to new data, but
also encompasses "new analyses of previously submitted data." _Id.,_ at 49604.
The rule accounts for the fact that risk information accumulates over time and
that the same data may take on a different meaning in light of subsequent
developments: "[I]f the sponsor submits adverse event information to FDA, and
then later conducts a new analysis of data showing risks of a different type
or of greater severity or frequency than did reports previously submitted to
FDA, the sponsor meets the requirement for `newly acquired information.'"
_Id.,_ at 49607; see also _id.,_ at 49606.

The record is limited concerning what newly acquired information Wyeth had or
should have had about the risks of IV-push administration of Phenergan because
Wyeth did not argue before the trial court that such information was required
for a CBE labeling change. Levine did, however, present evidence of at least
20 incidents prior to her injury in which a Phenergan injection resulted in
gangrene and an amputation. See App. 74, 252.[4] After the first such incident
came to Wyeth's attention in 1967, it notified the FDA and worked with the
agency to change Phenergan's label. In later years, as amputations continued
to occur, Wyeth could have analyzed the accumulating data and added a stronger
warning about IV-push administration of the drug.

Wyeth argues that if it had unilaterally added such a warning, it would have
violated federal law governing unauthorized distribution and misbranding. Its
argument that a change in Phenergan's labeling would have subjected it to
liability for unauthorized distribution rests on the assumption that this
labeling change would have rendered Phenergan a new drug lacking an effective
application. But strengthening the warning about IV-push administration would
not have made Phenergan a new drug. See 21 U.S.C. § 321(p)(1) (defining "new
drug"); 21 CFR § 310.3(h). Nor would this warning have rendered Phenergan
misbranded. The FDCA does not provide that a drug is misbranded simply because
the manufacturer has altered an FDA-approved label; instead, the misbranding
provision focuses on the substance of the label and, among other things,
proscribes labels that fail to include "adequate warnings." 21 U.S.C. §
352(f). Moreover, because the statute contemplates that federal juries will
resolve most misbranding claims, the FDA's belief that a drug is misbranded is
not conclusive. See §§ 331, 332, 334(a)-(b). And the very idea that the FDA
would bring an enforcement action against a manufacturer for strengthening a
warning pursuant to the CBE regulation is difficult to acceptneither Wyeth
nor the United States has identified a case in which the FDA has done so.

Wyeth's cramped reading of the CBE regulation and its broad reading of the
FDCA's misbranding and unauthorized distribution provisions are premised on a
more fundamental misunderstanding. Wyeth suggests that the FDA, rather than
the manufacturer, bears primary responsibility for drug labeling. Yet through
many amendments to the FDCA and to FDA regulations, it has remained a central
premise of federal drug regulation that the *1198 manufacturer bears
responsibility for the content of its label at all times. It is charged both
with crafting an adequate label and with ensuring that its warnings remain
adequate as long as the drug is on the market. See, _e.g.,_ 21 CFR § 201.80(e)
(requiring a manufacturer to revise its label "to include a warning as soon as
there is reasonable evidence of an association of a serious hazard with a
drug"); § 314.80(b) (placing responsibility for post-marketing surveillance on
the manufacturer); 73 Fed.Reg. 49605 ("Manufacturers continue to have a
responsibility under Federal law ... to maintain their labeling and update the
labeling with new safety information").

Indeed, prior to 2007, the FDA lacked the authority to order manufacturers to
revise their labels. See 121 Stat. 924-926. When Congress granted the FDA this
authority, it reaffirmed the manufacturer's obligations and referred
specifically to the CBE regulation, which both reflects the manufacturer's
ultimate responsibility for its label and provides a mechanism for adding
safety information to the label prior to FDA approval. See _id.,_ at 925-926
(stating that a manufacturer retains the responsibility "to maintain its label
in accordance with existing requirements, including subpart B of part 201 and
_sections 314.70_ and 601.12 of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (or any
successor regulations)" (emphasis added)). Thus, when the risk of gangrene
from IV-push injection of Phenergan became apparent, Wyeth had a duty to
provide a warning that adequately described that risk, and the CBE regulation
permitted it to provide such a warning before receiving the FDA's approval.

Of course, the FDA retains authority to reject labeling changes made pursuant
to the CBE regulation in its review of the manufacturer's supplemental
application, just as it retains such authority in reviewing all supplemental
applications. But absent clear evidence that the FDA would not have approved a
change to Phenergan's label, we will not conclude that it was impossible for
Wyeth to comply with both federal and state requirements.

Wyeth has offered no such evidence. It does not argue that it attempted to
give the kind of warning required by the Vermont jury but was prohibited from
doing so by the FDA.[5] See Tr. of Oral Arg. 12-13; see also Brief for United
States as _Amicus Curiae_ 25\. And while it does suggest that the FDA intended
to prohibit it from strengthening the warning about IV-push administration
because the agency deemed such a warning inappropriate in reviewing
Phenergan's drug applications, both the trial court and the Vermont Supreme
Court rejected this account as a matter of fact. In its decision on Wyeth's
motion for judgment as a matter of law, *1199 the trial court found "no
evidence in this record that either the FDA or the manufacturer gave more than
passing attention to the issue of" IV-push versus IV-drip administration. App.
249. The Vermont Supreme Court likewise concluded that the FDA had not made an
affirmative decision to preserve the IV-push method or intended to prohibit
Wyeth from strengthening its warning about IV-push administration. ___ Vt., at
___, 944 A.2d, at 188-189. Moreover, Wyeth does not argue that it supplied the
FDA with an evaluation or analysis concerning the specific dangers posed by
the IV-push method. We accordingly cannot credit Wyeth's contention that the
FDA would have prevented it from adding a stronger warning about the IV-push
method of intravenous administration.[6]

Impossibility pre-emption is a demanding defense. On the record before us,
Wyeth has failed to demonstrate that it was impossible for it to comply with
both federal and state requirements. The CBE regulation permitted Wyeth to
unilaterally strengthen its warning, and the mere fact that the FDA approved
Phenergan's label does not establish that it would have prohibited such a
change.

## IV

Wyeth also argues that requiring it to comply with a state-law duty to provide
a stronger warning about IV-push administration would obstruct the purposes
and objectives of federal drug labeling regulation. Levine's tort claims, it
maintains, are pre-empted because they interfere with "Congress's purpose to
entrust an expert agency to make drug labeling decisions that strike a balance
between competing objectives." Brief for Petitioner 46. We find no merit in
this argument, which relies on an untenable interpretation of congressional
intent and an overbroad view of an agency's power to pre-empt state law.

Wyeth contends that the FDCA establishes both a floor and a ceiling for drug
regulation: Once the FDA has approved a drug's label, a state-law verdict may
not deem the label inadequate, regardless of whether there is any evidence
that the FDA has considered the stronger warning at issue. The most glaring
problem with this argument is that all evidence of Congress' purposes is to
the contrary. Building on its 1906 Act, Congress enacted the FDCA to bolster
consumer protection against harmful products. See _Kordel v. United States,_
335 U.S. 345, 349, 69 S.Ct. 106, 93 L.Ed. 52 (1948); _United States v.
Sullivan,_ 332 U.S. 689, 696, 68 S.Ct. 331, 92 L.Ed. 297 (1948). Congress did
not provide a federal remedy for consumers harmed by unsafe or ineffective
drugs in the 1938 statute or in any subsequent amendment. Evidently, it
determined that widely available state rights of action provided appropriate
relief for injured consumers.[7] It may also have recognized that *1200 state-
law remedies further consumer protection by motivating manufacturers to
produce safe and effective drugs and to give adequate warnings.

If Congress thought state-law suits posed an obstacle to its objectives, it
surely would have enacted an express pre-emption provision at some point
during the FDCA's 70-year history. But despite its 1976 enactment of an
express pre-emption provision for medical devices, see § 521, 90 Stat. 574
(codified at 21 U.S.C. § 360k(a)), Congress has not enacted such a provision
for prescription drugs. See _Riegel,_ 552 U.S., at ___, 128 S.Ct., at 1009
("Congress could have applied the pre-emption clause to the entire FDCA. It
did not do so, but instead wrote a pre-emption clause that applies only to
medical devices").[8] Its silence on the issue, coupled with its certain
awareness of the prevalence of state tort litigation, is powerful evidence
that Congress did not intend FDA oversight to be the exclusive means of
ensuring drug safety and effectiveness. As Justice O'Connor explained in her
opinion for a unanimous Court: "The case for federal pre-emption is
particularly weak where Congress has indicated its awareness of the operation
of state law in a field of federal interest, and has nonetheless decided to
stand by both concepts and to tolerate whatever tension there [is] between
them." _Bonito Boats, Inc. v. Thunder Craft Boats, Inc.,_ 489 U.S. 141,
166-167, 109 S.Ct. 971, 103 L.Ed.2d 118 (1989) (internal quotation marks
omitted); see also _supra,_ at 1194 (discussing the presumption against pre-
emption).

Despite this evidence that Congress did not regard state tort litigation as an
obstacle to achieving its purposes, Wyeth nonetheless maintains that, because
the FDCA requires the FDA to determine that a drug is safe and effective under
the conditions set forth in its labeling, the agency must be presumed to have
performed a precise balancing of risks and benefits and to have established a
specific labeling standard that leaves no room for different state-law
judgments. In advancing this argument, Wyeth relies not on any statement by
Congress, but instead on the preamble to a 2006 FDA regulation governing the
content and format of prescription drug labels. See Brief for Petitioner 8,
11, 42, 45, and 50 (citing 71 Fed.Reg. 3922 (2006)). In that preamble, the FDA
declared that the FDCA establishes "both a `floor' and a `ceiling,'" so that
"FDA approval of labeling ... preempts conflicting or contrary State law."
_Id.,_ at 3934-3935. It further stated that certain state-law actions, such as
those involving failure-to-warn claims, "threaten FDA's statutorily prescribed
role as the expert Federal agency responsible for evaluating and regulating
drugs." _Id.,_ at 3935.

This Court has recognized that an agency regulation with the force of law can
pre-empt conflicting state requirements. See, _e.g.,_ _Geier v. American Honda
Motor Co.,_ 529 U.S. 861, 120 S.Ct. 1913, 146 L.Ed.2d 914 (2000);
_Hillsborough County v. Automated Medical Laboratories, Inc.,_ 471 U.S. 707,
713, 105 S.Ct. 2371, 85 L.Ed.2d 714 (1985). In such cases, the Court has *1201
performed its own conflict determination, relying on the substance of state
and federal law and not on agency proclamations of pre-emption. We are faced
with no such regulation in this case, but rather with an agency's mere
assertion that state law is an obstacle to achieving its statutory objectives.
Because Congress has not authorized the FDA to pre-empt state law directly,
cf. 21 U.S.C. § 360k (authorizing the FDA to determine the scope of the
Medical Devices Amendments' pre-emption clause),[9] the question is what
weight we should accord the FDA's opinion.

In prior cases, we have given "some weight" to an agency's views about the
impact of tort law on federal objectives when "the subject matter is
technica[l] and the relevant history and background are complex and
extensive." _Geier,_ 529 U.S., at 883, 120 S.Ct. 1913. Even in such cases,
however, we have not deferred to an agency's _conclusion_ that state law is
pre-empted. Rather, we have attended to an agency's explanation of how state
law affects the regulatory scheme. While agencies have no special authority to
pronounce on pre-emption absent delegation by Congress, they do have a unique
understanding of the statutes they administer and an attendant ability to make
informed determinations about how state requirements may pose an "obstacle to
the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of
Congress." _Hines,_ 312 U.S, at 67, 61 S.Ct. 399; see _Geier,_ 529 U.S., at
883, 120 S.Ct. 1913; _Lohr,_ 518 U.S., at 495-496, 116 S.Ct. 2240. The weight
we accord the agency's explanation of state law's impact on the federal scheme
depends on its thoroughness, consistency, and persuasiveness. Cf. _United
States v. Mead Corp.,_ 533 U.S. 218, 234-235, 121 S.Ct. 2164, 150 L.Ed.2d 292
(2001); _Skidmore v. Swift & Co.,_ 323 U.S. 134, 140, 65 S.Ct. 161, 89 L.Ed.
124 (1944).

Under this standard, the FDA's 2006 preamble does not merit deference. When
the FDA issued its notice of proposed rulemaking in December 2000, it
explained that the rule would "not contain policies that have federalism
implications or that preempt State law." 65 Fed.Reg. 81103; see also 71 _id.,_
at 3969 (noting that the "proposed rule did not propose to preempt state
law"). In 2006, the agency finalized the rule and, without offering States or
other interested parties notice or opportunity for comment, articulated a
sweeping position on the FDCA's pre-emptive effect in the regulatory preamble.
The agency's views on state law are inherently suspect in light of this
procedural failure.

Further, the preamble is at odds with what evidence we have of Congress'
purposes, and it reverses the FDA's own longstanding position without
providing a reasoned explanation, including any discussion of how state law
has interfered with the FDA's regulation of drug labeling during decades of
coexistence. The FDA's 2006 position plainly does not reflect the agency's own
view at all times relevant to this litigation. Not once prior to Levine's
injury *1202 did the FDA suggest that state tort law stood as an obstacle to
its statutory mission. To the contrary, it cast federal labeling standards as
a floor upon which States could build and repeatedly disclaimed any attempt to
pre-empt failure-to-warn claims. For instance, in 1998, the FDA stated that it
did "not believe that the evolution of state tort law [would] cause the
development of standards that would be at odds with the agency's regulations."
63 _id.,_ at 66384. It further noted that, in establishing "minimal standards"
for drug labels, it did not intend "to preclude the states from imposing
additional labeling requirements." _Ibid._ [10]

In keeping with Congress' decision not to pre-empt common-law tort suits, it
appears that the FDA traditionally regarded state law as a complementary form
of drug regulation. The FDA has limited resources to monitor the 11,000 drugs
on the market,[11] and manufacturers have superior access to information about
their drugs, especially in the postmarketing phase as new risks emerge. State
tort suits uncover unknown drug hazards and provide incentives for drug
manufacturers to disclose safety risks promptly. They also serve a distinct
compensatory function that may motivate injured persons to come forward with
information. Failure-to-warn actions, in particular, lend force to the FDCA's
premise that manufacturers, not the FDA, bear primary responsibility for their
drug labeling at all times. Thus, the FDA long maintained that state law
offers an additional, and important, layer of consumer protection that
complements FDA regulation.[12]*1203 The agency's 2006 preamble represents a
dramatic change in position.

Largely based on the FDA's new position, Wyeth argues that this case presents
a conflict between state and federal law analogous to the one at issue in
_Geier._ There, we held that state tort claims premised on Honda's failure to
install airbags conflicted with a federal regulation that did not require
airbags for all cars. The Department of Transportation (DOT) had promulgated a
rule that provided car manufacturers with a range of choices among passive
restraint devices. _Geier,_ 529 U.S., at 875, 120 S.Ct. 1913. Rejecting an
"`all airbag'" standard, the agency had called for a gradual phase-in of a mix
of passive restraints in order to spur technological development and win
consumer acceptance. _Id.,_ at 879, 120 S.Ct. 1913. Because the plaintiff's
claim was that car manufacturers had a duty to install airbags, it presented
an obstacle to achieving "the variety and mix of devices that the federal
regulation sought." _Id.,_ at 881, 120 S.Ct. 1913.

Wyeth and the dissent contend that the regulatory scheme in this case is
nearly identical, but, as we have described, it is quite different. In
_Geier,_ the DOT conducted a formal rulemaking and then adopted a plan to
phase in a mix of passive restraint devices. Examining the rule itself and the
DOT's contemporaneous record, which revealed the factors the agency had
weighed and the balance it had struck, we determined that state tort suits
presented an obstacle to the federal scheme. After conducting our own pre-
emption analysis, we considered the agency's explanation of how state law
interfered with its regulation, regarding it as further support for our
independent conclusion that the plaintiff's tort claim obstructed the federal
regime.

By contrast, we have no occasion in this case to consider the pre-emptive
effect of a specific agency regulation bearing the force of law. And the FDA's
newfound opinion, expressed in its 2006 preamble, that state law "frustrate[s]
the agency's implementation of its statutory mandate," 71 Fed.Reg. 3934, does
not merit deference for the reasons we have explained.[13] Indeed, the
"complex and extensive" regulatory history and background relevant to this
case, _Geier,_ 529 U.S., at 883, 120 S.Ct. 1913, undercut the FDA's recent
pronouncements of pre-emption, as they reveal the longstanding coexistence of
state and federal law and the FDA's traditional recognition of state-law
remediesa recognition in place each time the agency reviewed Wyeth's
Phenergan label.[14]

*1204 In short, Wyeth has not persuaded us that failure-to-warn claims like Levine's obstruct the federal regulation of drug labeling. Congress has repeatedly declined to pre-empt state law, and the FDA's recently adopted position that state tort suits interfere with its statutory mandate is entitled to no weight. Although we recognize that some state-law claims might well frustrate the achievement of congressional objectives, this is not such a case.

## V

We conclude that it is not impossible for Wyeth to comply with its state and
federal law obligations and that Levine's common-law claims do not stand as an
obstacle to the accomplishment of Congress' purposes in the FDCA. Accordingly,
the judgment of the Vermont Supreme Court is affirmed.

_It is so ordered._

Justice BREYER, concurring.

I write separately to emphasize the Court's statement that "we have no
occasion in this case to consider the pre-emptive effect of a specific agency
regulation bearing the force of law." _Ante,_ at 1203. State tort law will
sometimes help the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) "uncover unknown drug
hazards and [encourage] drug manufacturers to disclose safety risks." _Ante,_
at 1202. But it is also possible that state tort law will sometimes interfere
with the FDA's desire to create a drug label containing a specific set of
cautions and instructions. I also note that some have argued that state tort
law can sometimes raise prices to the point where those who are sick are
unable to obtain the drugs they need. See Lasagna, The Chilling Effect of
Product Liability on New Drug Development, in The Liability Maze 334, 335-336
(P. Huber & R. Litan eds. 1991). The FDA may seek to determine whether and
when state tort law acts as a help or a hindrance to achieving the safe drug-
related medical care that Congress sought. _Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr,_ 518 U.S.
470, 506, 116 S.Ct. 2240, 135 L.Ed.2d 700 (1996) (BREYER, J., concurring in
part and concurring in judgment); cf. _Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC,_ 544
U.S. 431, 454-455, 125 S.Ct. 1788, 161 L.Ed.2d 687 (2005) (BREYER, J.,
concurring). It may seek to embody those determinations in lawful specific
regulations describing, for example, when labeling requirements serve as a
ceiling as well as a floor. And it is possible that such determinations would
have pre-emptive effect. See _Lohr, supra,_ at 505, 116 S.Ct. 2240 (opinion of
BREYER, J.) (citing _Hillsborough County v. Automated Medical Laboratories,
Inc.,_ 471 U.S. 707, 105 S.Ct. 2371, 85 L.Ed.2d 714 (1985)). I agree with the
Court, however, that such a regulation is not at issue in this case.

Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.

I agree with the Court that the fact that the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approved the label for petitioner Wyeth's drug Phenergan does not pre-
empt the state-law judgment before the Court. That judgment was based on a
jury finding that the label did not adequately warn of the risk involved in
administering Phenergan through the IV-push injection method. Under federal
law, without prior approval from the FDA, Wyeth could have "add[ed] or
strengthen[ed]" information on its label about "a contraindication, warning,
precaution, or adverse reaction," 21 CFR *1205 § 314.70(c)(6)(iii)(A) (2008),
or "about dosage and administration that is intended to increase the safe use
of the drug product," § 314.70(c)(6)(iii)(C), in order to "reflect newly
acquired information," including "new analyses of previously submitted data,"
about the dangers of IV-push administration of Phenergan, 73 Fed.Reg. 49603,
49609 (2008). It thus was possible for Wyeth to label and market Phenergan in
compliance with federal law while also providing additional warning
information on its label beyond that previously approved by the FDA. In
addition, federal law does not give drug manufacturers an unconditional right
to market their federally approved drug at all times with the precise label
initially approved by the FDA. The Vermont court's judgment in this case,
therefore, did not directly conflict with federal law and is not pre-empted.

I write separately, however, because I cannot join the majority's implicit
endorsement of far-reaching implied pre-emption doctrines. In particular, I
have become increasingly skeptical of this Court's "purposes and objectives"
pre-emption jurisprudence. Under this approach, the Court routinely
invalidates state laws based on perceived conflicts with broad federal policy
objectives, legislative history, or generalized notions of congressional
purposes that are not embodied within the text of federal law. Because implied
pre-emption doctrines that wander far from the statutory text are inconsistent
with the Constitution, I concur only in the judgment.

## I

## A

In order "to ensure the protection of our fundamental liberties," _Atascadero
State Hospital v. Scanlon,_ 473 U.S. 234, 242, 105 S.Ct. 3142, 87 L.Ed.2d 171
(1985) (internal quotation marks omitted), the "Constitution establishes a
system of dual sovereignty between the States and the Federal Government."
_Gregory v. Ashcroft,_ 501 U.S. 452, 457, 111 S.Ct. 2395, 115 L.Ed.2d 410
(1991). The Framers adopted this "`constitutionally mandated balance of
power,'" _Atascadero State Hospital, supra,_ at 242, 105 S.Ct. 3142, to
"reduce the risk of tyranny and abuse from either front," because a
"federalist structure of joint sovereigns preserves to the people numerous
advantages," such as "a decentralized government that will be more sensitive
to the diverse needs of a heterogeneous society" and "increase[d] opportunity
for citizen involvement in democratic processes," _Gregory, supra,_ at 458,
111 S.Ct. 2395. Furthermore, as the Framers observed, the "compound republic
of America" provides "a double security ... to the rights of the people"
because "the power surrendered by the people is first divided between two
distinct governments, and then the portion allotted to each subdivided among
distinct and separate departments." The Federalist No. 51, p. 266 (M. Beloff
ed., 2d ed.1987).

Under this federalist system, "the States possess sovereignty concurrent with
that of the Federal Government, subject only to limitations imposed by the
Supremacy Clause." _Tafflin v. Levitt,_ 493 U.S. 455, 458, 110 S.Ct. 792, 107
L.Ed.2d 887 (1990). In this way, the Supremacy Clause gives the Federal
Government "a decided advantage in [a] delicate balance" between federal and
state sovereigns. _Gregory,_ 501 U.S., at 460, 111 S.Ct. 2395. "As long as it
is acting within the powers granted it under the Constitution, Congress may
impose its will on the States." _Ibid._ That is an "extraordinary power in a
federalist system." _Ibid._

Nonetheless, the States retain substantial sovereign authority. U.S. Const.,
Amdt. 10 ("The powers not delegated to *1206 the United States by the
Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States
respectively, or to the people"); see also _Alden v. Maine,_ 527 U.S. 706,
713, 119 S.Ct. 2240, 144 L.Ed.2d 636 (1999); _Printz v. United States,_ 521
U.S. 898, 918-922, 117 S.Ct. 2365, 138 L.Ed.2d 914 (1997); _New York v. United
States,_ 505 U.S. 144, 155-156, 112 S.Ct. 2408, 120 L.Ed.2d 120 (1992);
_Gregory, supra,_ at 457-459, 111 S.Ct. 2395; _Tafflin, supra,_ at 458, 110
S.Ct. 792. In accordance with the text and structure of the Constitution,
"[t]he powers delegated by the proposed constitution to the federal
government, are few and defined" and "[t]hose which are to remain in the state
governments, are numerous and indefinite." The Federalist No. 45, at 237-238.
Indeed, in protecting our constitutional government, "the preservation of the
States, and the maintenance of their governments, are as much within the
design and care of the Constitution as the preservation of the Union and the
maintenance of the National government." _Texas v. White,_ 7 Wall. 700, 725,
19 L.Ed. 227 (1869), quoted in _New York v. United States, supra,_ at 162, 112
S.Ct. 2408.

As a result, in order to protect the delicate balance of power mandated by the
Constitution, the Supremacy Clause must operate only in accordance with its
terms. The clause provides:

> "This Constitution, and the Laws of the United States which shall be made in
> Pursuance thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall be made, under the
> Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land; and
> the Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any Thing in the
> Constitution or Laws of any state to the Contrary notwithstanding." Art. VI,
> cl. 2.

With respect to federal laws, then, the Supremacy Clause gives "supreme"
status only to those that are "made in Pursuance" of "[t]his Constitution."
_Ibid.;_ see 3 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States
§ 1831, p. 694 (1833) (hereinafter Story) ("It will be observed, that the
supremacy of the laws is attached to those only, which are made in pursuance
of the constitution").

Federal laws "made in Pursuance" of the Constitution must comply with two key
structural limitations in the Constitution that ensure that the Federal
Government does not amass too much power at the expense of the States. The
first structural limitation, which the parties have not raised in this case,
is "the Constitution's conferral upon Congress of not all governmental powers,
but only discrete, enumerated ones." _Printz, supra,_ at 919, 117 S.Ct. 2365;
see also _United States v. Morrison,_ 529 U.S. 598, 618, n. 8, 120 S.Ct. 1740,
146 L.Ed.2d 658 (2000); _New York v. United States, supra,_ at 155-157, 112
S.Ct. 2408; _McCulloch v. Maryland,_ 4 Wheat. 316, 405, 4 L.Ed. 579 (1819)
("This government is acknowledged by all to be one of enumerated powers").[1]

The second structural limitation is the complex set of procedures that
Congress *1207 and the President must follow to enact "Laws of the United
States." See _INS v. Chadha,_ 462 U.S. 919, 945-946, 103 S.Ct. 2764, 77
L.Ed.2d 317 (1983) (setting forth the Constitution's Bicameral and Presentment
Clauses, Art. I, § 7, cls. 2-3, which "prescribe and define the respective
functions of the Congress and of the Executive in the legislative process").
"[T]he Framers were acutely conscious that the bicameral requirement and the
Presentment Clauses would serve essential constitutional functions," _Chadha,_
462 U.S., at 951, 103 S.Ct. 2764, by allowing the passage of legislation only
after it has proceeded through "a step-by-step, deliberate and deliberative
process," _id.,_ at 959, 103 S.Ct. 2764, that was "finely wrought and
exhaustively considered" by the Framers, _id.,_ at 951, 103 S.Ct. 2764. The
Supremacy Clause thus requires that pre-emptive effect be given only those to
federal standards and policies that are set forth in, or necessarily follow
from, the statutory text that was produced through the constitutionally
required bicameral and presentment procedures. See 3 J. Story § 1831, at 694
(Actions of the Federal Government "which are not pursuant to its
constitutional powers, but which are invasions of the residuary authorities of
the smaller societies," are not "the supreme law of the land. They will be
merely acts of usurpation, and will deserve to be treated as such").

## B

In light of these constitutional principles, I have become "increasing[ly]
reluctan[t] to expand federal statutes beyond their terms through doctrines of
implied pre-emption." _Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC,_ 544 U.S. 431, 459, 125
S.Ct. 1788, 161 L.Ed.2d 687 (2005) (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment in part
and dissenting in part). My review of this Court's broad implied pre-emption
precedents, particularly its "purposes and objectives" pre-emption
jurisprudence, has increased my concerns that implied pre-emption doctrines
have not always been constitutionally applied. Under the vague and
"potentially boundless" doctrine of "purposes and objectives" pre-emption,
_Geier v. American Honda Motor Co.,_ 529 U.S. 861, 907, 120 S.Ct. 1913, 146
L.Ed.2d 914 (2000) (STEVENS, J., dissenting), for example, the Court has pre-
empted state law based on its interpretation of broad federal policy
objectives, legislative history, or generalized notions of congressional
purposes that are not contained within the text of federal law. See, _e.g.,_
_Pharmaceutical Research and Mfrs. of America v. Walsh,_ 538 U.S. 644, 678,
123 S.Ct. 1855, 155 L.Ed.2d 889 (2003) (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment)
(referring to the "concomitant danger of invoking obstacle pre-emption based
on the arbitrary selection of one purpose to the exclusion of others");
_Crosby v. National Foreign Trade Council,_ 530 U.S. 363, 388-391, 120 S.Ct.
2288, 147 L.Ed.2d 352 (2000) (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment) (criticizing
the majority's reliance on legislative history to discern statutory intent
when that intent was "perfectly obvious on the face of th[e] statute");
_Geier, supra,_ at 874-883, 120 S.Ct. 1913 (relying on regulatory history,
agency comments, and the Government's litigating position to determine that
federal law pre-empted state law).

Congressional and agency musings, however, do not satisfy the Art. I, § 7
requirements for enactment of federal law and, therefore, do not pre-empt
state law under the Supremacy Clause. When analyzing the pre-emptive effect of
federal statutes or regulations validly promulgated thereunder, "[e]vidence of
pre-emptive purpose [must be] sought in the text and structure of the
[provision] at issue" to comply with the Constitution. _CSX Transp., Inc. v.
Easterwood,_ 507 U.S. 658, 664, 113 S.Ct. *1208 1732, 123 L.Ed.2d 387 (1993);
see also _New York v. FERC,_ 535 U.S. 1, 18, 122 S.Ct. 1012, 152 L.Ed.2d 47
(2002) ("[A] federal agency may pre-empt state law only when and if it is
acting within the scope of its congressional delegated authority... [for] an
agency literally has no power to act, let alone pre-empt the validly enacted
legislation of a sovereign State, unless and until Congress confers power upon
it" (internal quotation marks omitted; second alteration in original)); _Camps
Newfound/Owatonna, Inc. v. Town of Harrison,_ 520 U.S. 564, 617, 117 S.Ct.
1590, 137 L.Ed.2d 852 (1997) (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (noting that "treating
unenacted congressional intent as if it were law would be constitutionally
dubious"). Pre-emption analysis should not be "a freewheeling judicial inquiry
into whether a state statute is in tension with federal objectives, but an
inquiry into whether the ordinary meanings of state and federal law conflict."
_Bates, supra,_ at 459, 125 S.Ct. 1788 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment in
part and dissenting in part) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted);
see also _Geier, supra,_ at 911, 120 S.Ct. 1913 (STEVENS, J., dissenting)
("[P]re-emption analysis is, or at least should be, a matter of precise
statutory [or regulatory] construction rather than an exercise in free-form
judicial policymaking" (internal quotation marks omitted)). Pre-emption must
turn on whether state law conflicts with the text of the relevant federal
statute or with the federal regulations authorized by that text. See _Foster
v. Love,_ 522 U.S. 67, 71, 118 S.Ct. 464, 139 L.Ed.2d 369 (1997) (finding that
conflict pre-emption question "turn[ed] entirely on the meaning of the state
and federal statutes" at issue before the Court); see also _New York v. FERC,
supra,_ at 19, 122 S.Ct. 1012.

## II

This Court has determined that there are two categories of conflict pre-
emption, both of which Wyeth contends are at issue in this case. First, the
Court has found pre-emption "where compliance with both federal and state
regulations is a physical impossibility for one engaged in interstate
commerce." _Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul,_ 373 U.S. 132,
142-143, 83 S.Ct. 1210, 10 L.Ed.2d 248 (1963). Second, the Court has
determined that federal law pre-empts state law when, "under the circumstances
of [a] particular case, [state] law stands as an obstacle to the
accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress."
_Hines v. Davidowitz,_ 312 U.S. 52, 67, 61 S.Ct. 399, 85 L.Ed. 581 (1941).[2]

## A

Wyeth first contends that "it would have been impossible for it to comply with
the state-law duty to modify Phenergan's labeling without violating federal
law." _Ante,_ at 1193 (opinion for the Court by STEVENS, J.). But, as the
majority explains, the text of the relevant federal statutory provisions and
the corresponding regulations do not directly conflict with the state-law
judgment before us.

This Court has used different formulations of the standard to be used in
deciding *1209 whether state and federal law conflict, and thus lead to pre-
emption, under the "impossibility" doctrine. See, _e.g.,_ _Geier, supra,_ at
873, 120 S.Ct. 1913 ("a case in which state law penalizes what federal law
requires"); _American Telephone & Telegraph Co. v. Central Office Telephone,
Inc.,_ 524 U.S. 214, 227, 118 S.Ct. 1956, 141 L.Ed.2d 222 (1998) _(AT & T)_
(when state-law claims "directly conflict" with federal law), cited in _Geier,
supra,_ at 874, 120 S.Ct. 1913 (describing _AT & T_ as a "cas[e] involving
impossibility"); _Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, supra,_ at 142-143, 83 S.Ct.
1210 ("where compliance with both federal and state regulations is a physical
impossibility"). The Court has generally articulated a very narrow
"impossibility standard," see _Crosby,_ 530 U.S., at 372-373, 120 S.Ct. 2288
(citing _Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, supra,_ at 142-143, 83 S.Ct. 1210);
see also _Sprietsma v. Mercury Marine,_ 537 U.S. 51, 64-65, 123 S.Ct. 518, 154
L.Ed.2d 466 (2002); _United States v. Locke,_ 529 U.S. 89, 109, 120 S.Ct.
1135, 146 L.Ed.2d 69 (2000)in part because the overly broad sweep of the
Court's "purposes and objectives" approach, see _infra,_ at 1211-1217, has
rendered it unnecessary for the Court to rely on "impossibility" pre-emption.

The Court, in fact, has not explained why a narrow "physical impossibility"
standard is the best proxy for determining when state and federal laws
"directly conflict" for purposes of the Supremacy Clause. There could be
instances where it is not "physically impossible" to comply with both state
and federal law, even when the state and federal laws give directly
conflicting commands. See Nelson, Preemption, 86 Va. L.Rev. 225, 260-261
(2000). For example, if federal law gives an individual the right to engage in
certain behavior that state law prohibits, the laws would give contradictory
commands notwithstanding the fact that an individual could comply with both by
electing to refrain from the covered behavior. _Ibid._ Therefore, "physical
impossibility" may not be the most appropriate standard for determining
whether the text of state and federal laws directly conflict. See _ibid._
(concluding that the Supremacy Clause does not limit direct conflicts to cases
with "physically impossible" conflicts and arguing that evidence from the
Founding supports a standard of "logical-contradiction"); see also _AT & T,
supra,_ at 227, 118 S.Ct. 1956 (requiring that the state-law claims "directly
conflict" with federal law); 3 Story § 1836, at 701 (suggesting instead that a
state law is pre-empted by the Supremacy Clause when it is " _repugnant_ to
the constitution of the United States" (emphasis added)).

Nonetheless, whatever the precise constitutional contours of implied pre-
emption may be, I am satisfied that it does not operate against respondent's
judgment below. The text of the federal laws at issue do not require that the
state-court judgment at issue be pre-empted, under either the narrow "physical
impossibility" standard, _Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, supra,_ at 142-143,
83 S.Ct. 1210, or a more general "direc[t] conflict" standard, _AT & T,
supra,_ at 227, 118 S.Ct. 1956.

Under the FDA's "changes being effected" regulation, 21 CFR §
314.70(c)(6)(iii), which was promulgated pursuant to the FDA's statutory
authority, it is physically possible for Wyeth to market Phenergan in
compliance with federal and Vermont law. As the majority explains, Wyeth could
have changed the warning on its label regarding IV-push without violating
federal law. See _ante,_ at 1196-1197. The "changes being effected" regulation
allows drug manufacturers to change their labels without the FDA's preapproval
if the changes "add or strengthen a contraindication, warning, precaution, or
adverse *1210 reaction," § 314.70(c)(6)(iii)(A), or "add or strengthen an
instruction about dosage and administration that is intended to increase the
safe use of the drug product," § 314.70(c)(6)(iii)(C), in order to "reflect
newly acquired information," including "new analyses of previously submitted
data," 73 Fed.Reg. 49603, 49609. Under the terms of these regulations, after
learning of new incidences of gangrene-induced amputation resulting from the
IV-push administration of Phenergan, see _ante,_ at 1196-1197, federal law
gave Wyeth the authority to change Phenergan's label to "strengthen a ...
warning," "strengthen a... precaution," § 314.70(c)(6)(iii)(A), or to
"strengthen an instruction about ... administration [of the IV-push method]
... to increase the safe use of the drug product," § 314.70(c)(6)(iii)(C).
Thus, it was physically possible for Wyeth to comply with a state-law
requirement to provide stronger warnings on Phenergan about the risks of the
IV-push administration method while continuing to market Phenergan in
compliance with federal law.

In addition, the text of the statutory provisions governing FDA drug labeling,
and the regulations promulgated thereunder, do not give drug manufacturers an
unconditional right to market their federally approved drug at all times with
the precise label initially approved by the FDA. Thus, there is no "direct
conflict" between the federal labeling law and the state-court judgment. The
statute prohibits the interstate marketing of any drug, except for those that
are federally approved. See 21 U.S.C. § 355(a) (" _No person shall_ introduce
or deliver for introduction into interstate commerce any new drug, _unless_ an
approval of an application filed pursuant to subsection (b) or (j) of this
section is effective with respect to such drug" (emphasis added)). To say, as
the statute does, that Wyeth may not market a drug without federal approval (
_i.e.,_ without an FDA-approved label) is not to say that federal approval
gives Wyeth the unfettered right, for all time, to market its drug with the
specific label that was federally approved. Initial approval of a label
amounts to a finding by the FDA that the label is safe for purposes of gaining
federal approval to market the drug. It does not represent a finding that the
drug, as labeled, can never be deemed unsafe by later federal action, or as in
this case, the application of state law.

Instead, FDA regulations require a drug manufacturerafter initial federal
approval of a drug's labelto revise the federally approved label "to include
a warning as soon as there is reasonable evidence of an association of a
serious hazard with a drug." 21 CFR § 201.80(e). Drug manufacturers are also
required to "establish and maintain records and make reports" to the FDA about
"[a]ny adverse event associated with the use of a drug in humans, whether or
not considered drug related," after it has received federal approval. §§
314.80(a), (c), (j). In addition, the manufacturer must make periodic reports
about "adverse drug experience[s]" associated with its drug and include "a
history of actions taken since the last report because of adverse drug
experiences (for example, labeling changes or studies initiated)." §§
314.80(c)(2)(i)-(ii). When such records and reports are not made, the FDA can
withdraw its approval of the drug. § 314.80(j); see also 21 U.S.C. § 355(e)
("The Secretary may ... withdraw the approval of an application ... if the
Secretary finds ... that the applicant has failed to establish a system for
maintaining required records, or has repeatedly or deliberately failed to
maintain such records or to make required reports"). The FDA may also
determine that a drug is no longer safe for use based on "clinical or other
experience, tests, or other scientific *1211 data." _Ibid._ (approval may be
withdrawn if "the Secretary finds ... that clinical or other experience,
tests, or other scientific data show that such drug is unsafe for use under
the conditions of use upon the basis of which the application was approved").

The text of the statutory provisions and the accompanying regulatory scheme
governing the FDA drug approval process, therefore, establish that the FDA's
initial approval of a drug is not a guarantee that the drug's label will never
need to be changed. And nothing in the text of the statutory or regulatory
scheme necessarily insulates Wyeth from liability under state law simply
because the FDA has approved a particular label.

In sum, the relevant federal law did not give Wyeth a right that the state-law
judgment took away, and it was possible for Wyeth to comply with both federal
law and the Vermont-law judgment at issue here. The federal statute and
regulations neither prohibited the stronger warning label required by the
state judgment, nor insulated Wyeth from the risk of state-law liability. With
no "direct conflict" between the federal and state law, then, the state-law
judgment is not pre-empted. Cf. _AT & T,_ 524 U.S., at 221-226, 118 S.Ct. 1956
(finding pre-emption where federal law forbade common carriers from extending
communications privileges requested by state-law claims); _Foster,_ 522 U.S.,
at 68-69, 118 S.Ct. 464 (finding pre-emption where the federal statute
required congressional elections on a particular date different from that
provided by state statute).

## B

Wyeth also contends that state and federal law conflict because "recognition
of [this] state tort action creates an unacceptable `obstacle to the
accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress,'
_Hines v. Davidowitz,_ 312 U.S. 52, 67, 61 S.Ct. 399, 85 L.Ed. 581 (1941),
because it substitutes a lay jury's decision about drug labeling for the
expert judgment of the FDA." _Ante,_ at 1193-1194. This Court's entire body of
"purposes and objectives" pre-emption jurisprudence is inherently flawed. The
cases improperly rely on legislative history, broad atextual notions of
congressional purpose, and even congressional inaction in order to pre-empt
state law. See _supra,_ at 1192-1194. I, therefore, cannot join the majority's
analysis of this claim, see _ante,_ at 1199-1204, or its reaffirmation of the
Court's "purposes and objectives" jurisprudence, _ante,_ at 1199-1200
(analyzing congressional purposes); _ante,_ at 1201 (quoting the "`purposes
and objectives'" pre-emption standard from _Hines v. Davidowitz,_ 312 U.S. 52,
67, 61 S.Ct. 399, 85 L.Ed. 581 (1941), and _Geier,_ 529 U.S., at 883, 120
S.Ct. 1913); _ante,_ at 1202-1203, and nn. 13-14 (analyzing this case in light
of _Geier,_ 529 U.S. 861, 120 S.Ct. 1913, 146 L.Ed.2d 914).

## 1

The Court first formulated its current "purposes and objectives" pre-emption
standard in _Hines_ when it considered whether the federal Alien Registration
Act pre-empted an Alien Registration Act adopted by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The Court did not find that the two statutes, by their terms,
directly conflicted. See _Hines, supra,_ at 59-60, and n. 1, 61 S.Ct. 399
(citing Pa. Stat. Ann., Tit. 35, §§ 1801-1806 (Purdon Supp.1940)); 312 U.S.,
at 60, and n. 5, 61 S.Ct. 399 (citing Act of June 28, 1940, 54 Stat. 670); 312
U.S., at 69-74, 61 S.Ct. 399 (analyzing numerous extratextual sources and
finding pre-emption without concluding that the terms of the federal and state
laws directly conflict); see also _id.,_ at 78, 61 S.Ct. 399 (noting that
"[i]t is conceded that the federal *1212 act in operation does not at any
point conflict with the state statute" (Stone, J., dissenting)).[3]
Nonetheless, the Court determined that it was not confined to considering
merely the terms of the relevant federal law in conducting its pre-emption
analysis. Rather, it went on to ask whether the state law "stands as an
obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and
objectives of Congress." _Id.,_ at 67, 61 S.Ct. 399.

In so doing, the Court looked far beyond the relevant federal statutory text
and instead embarked on its own freeranging speculation about what the
purposes of the federal law must have been. See _id.,_ at 69-74, 61 S.Ct. 399.
In addition to the meaning of the relevant federal text, the Court attempted
to discern "[t]he nature of the power exerted by Congress, the object sought
to be attained, and the character of the obligations imposed by the law."
_Id.,_ at 70, 61 S.Ct. 399. To do so, the Court looked in part to public
sentiment, noting that "[o]pposition to laws... singling out aliens as
particularly dangerous and undesirable groups, is deep-seated in this
country." _Ibid._ The Court also relied on statements by particular Members of
Congress and on congressional inaction, finding it pertinent that numerous
bills with requirements similar to Pennsylvania's law had failed to garner
enough votes in Congress to become law. _Id.,_ at 71-73, and nn. 32-34, 61
S.Ct. 399. Concluding that these sources revealed a federal purpose to
"protect the personal liberties of law-abiding aliens through one uniform
national registration system," the Court held that the Pennsylvania law was
pre-empted. _Id.,_ at 74, 61 S.Ct. 399.

Justice Stone, in dissent, questioned the majority's decision to read an
exclusive registration system for aliens into a statute that did not
specifically provide such exclusivity. See _id.,_ at 75, 61 S.Ct. 399. He
noted his concern that state power would be improperly diminished through a
pre-emption doctrine driven by the Court's "own conceptions of a policy which
Congress ha[d] not expressed and which is not plainly to be inferred from the
legislation which it ha[d] enacted." _Ibid._ In his view, nothing that
Congress enacted had "denie[d] the states the practicable means of identifying
their alien residents and of recording their whereabouts." _Id.,_ at 78, 61
S.Ct. 399. Yet, the _Hines_ majority employed pre-emption to override numerous
state alien-registration laws even though enacted federal law "at no point
conflict[ed] with the state legislation and [was] *1213 harmonious with it."
_Id.,_ at 79, 61 S.Ct. 399.[4]

## 2

The consequences of this Court's broad approach to "purposes and objectives"
pre-emption are exemplified in this Court's decision in _Geier,_ which both
the majority and the dissent incorporate into their analysis today. See
_ante,_ at 1202-1203, and nn. 13-14; _post,_ at 1220-1222 (opinion of ALITO,
J.). In _Geier,_ pursuant to the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act
of 1966 (Safety Act), 80 Stat. 718, 15 U.S.C. § 1381 _et seq._ (1988 ed.), the
Department of Transportation (DOT) had promulgated a Federal Motor Vehicle
Safety Standard that "required auto manufacturers to equip some but not all of
their 1987 vehicles with passive restraints." 529 U.S., at 864-865, 120 S.Ct.
1913. The case required this Court to decide whether the Safety Act pre-empted
a state common-law tort action in which the plaintiff claimed that an auto
manufacturer, though in compliance with the federal standard, should
nonetheless have equipped a 1987 automobile with airbags. _Id.,_ at 865, 120
S.Ct. 1913. The Court first concluded that the Safety Act's express pre-
emption provision and its saving clause, read together, did not expressly pre-
empt state common-law claims. See _id.,_ at 867-868, 120 S.Ct. 1913.[5] The
Court then proceeded to consider whether the state action was nonetheless pre-
empted as an "obstacle" to the purposes of the federal law. The Court held
that the state tort claim was pre-empted, relying in large part on comments
that DOT made when promulgating its regulation, statements that the Government
made in its brief to the Court, and regulatory history that related to the
federal regulation of passive restraints. See _id.,_ at 874-886, 120 S.Ct.
1913.

In particular, the majority found that DOT intended to "deliberately provid[e]
the manufacturer[s] with a range of choices among different passive restraint
devices" and to "bring about a mix of different devices introduced gradually
over time," based on comments that DOT made when promulgating its regulation,
rather *1214 than the Safety Act's text. _Id.,_ at 875, 120 S.Ct. 1913. The
majority also embarked on a judicial inquiry into "why and how DOT sought
these objectives," _ibid.,_ by considering regulatory history and the
Government's brief, which described DOT's safety standard as "`embod[ying] the
Secretary's policy judgment that safety would best be promoted if
manufacturers installed _alternative_ protection systems in their fleets
rather than one particular system in every car,'" _id.,_ at 881, 120 S.Ct.
1913 (quoting Brief for United States as _Amicus Curiae_ in _Geier v. American
Honda Motor Co.,_ O.T.1999, No. 98-1811, p. 25); see also 529 U.S., at
883-884, 120 S.Ct. 1913. Based on this " _ex post_ administrative litigating
position and inferences from regulatory history and final commentary," _id.,_
at 910-911, 120 S.Ct. 1913 (STEVENS, J., dissenting), the Court found that the
state action was pre-empted because it would have required manufacturers of
all cars similar to that in which the plaintiff was injured to "install
airbags rather than other passive restraint systems" and would have,
therefore, "presented an obstacle to the variety and mix of devices that the
federal regulation sought" to phase in gradually, _id.,_ at 881, 120 S.Ct.
1913.

The Court's decision in _Geier_ to apply "purposes and objectives" pre-emption
based on agency comments, regulatory history, and agency litigating positions
was especially flawed, given that it conflicted with the plain statutory text
of the saving clause within the Safety Act, which explicitly preserved state
common-law actions by providing that "[c]ompliance with any Federal motor
vehicle safety standard issued under this subchapter does not exempt any
person from any liability under common law," 15 U.S.C. § 1397(k) (1988
ed.).[6] See _Engine Mfrs. Assn. v. South Coast Air Quality Management Dist.,_
541 U.S. 246, 252, 124 S.Ct. 1756, 158 L.Ed.2d 529 (2004) ("Statutory
construction must begin with the language employed by Congress and the
assumption that the ordinary meaning of that language accurately expresses the
legislative purpose" (internal quotation marks omitted)); _West Virginia Univ.
Hospitals, Inc. v. Casey,_ 499 U.S. 83, 98, 111 S.Ct. 1138, 113 L.Ed.2d 68
(1991) ("The best evidence of th[e] purpose [of a statute] is the statutory
text adopted by both Houses of Congress and submitted to the President"). In
addition, the Court's reliance on its divined purpose of the federal lawto
gradually phase in a mix of passive restraint systemsin order to invalidate
*1215 a State's imposition of a greater safety standard was contrary to the
more general express statutory goal of the Safety Act "to reduce traffic
accidents and deaths and injuries to persons resulting from traffic
accidents," 15 U.S.C. § 1381 (1988 ed.). This Court has repeatedly stated that
when statutory language is plain, it must be enforced according to its terms.
See _Jimenez v. Quarterman,_ 555 U.S. ___, 129 S.Ct. 681, 172 L.Ed.2d 475
(2009); see also, _e.g.,_ _Dodd v. United States,_ 545 U.S. 353, 359, 125
S.Ct. 2478, 162 L.Ed.2d 343 (2005); _Lamie v. United States Trustee,_ 540 U.S.
526, 534, 124 S.Ct. 1023, 157 L.Ed.2d 1024 (2004); _Hartford Underwriters Ins.
Co. v. Union Planters Bank, N. A.,_ 530 U.S. 1, 6, 120 S.Ct. 1942, 147 L.Ed.2d
1 (2000). The text in _Geier_ "directly addressed the precise question at
issue" before the Court, so that should have been "the end of the matter; for
the court, as well as the agency, must give effect to the unambiguously
expressed intent of Congress." _National Assn. of Home Builders v. Defenders
of Wildlife,_ 551 U.S. 644, ___, 127 S.Ct. 2518, 2534, 168 L.Ed.2d 467 (2007)
(internal quotation marks omitted). With text that allowed state actions like
the one at issue in _Geier,_ the Court had no authority to comb through agency
commentaries to find a basis for an alternative conclusion.

Applying "purposes and objectives" pre-emption in _Geier,_ as in any case,
allowed this Court to vacate a judgment issued by another sovereign based on
nothing more than assumptions and goals that were untethered from the
constitutionally enacted federal law authorizing the federal regulatory
standard that was before the Court. See _Watters v. Wachovia Bank, N. A.,_ 550
U.S. 1, 44, 127 S.Ct. 1559, 167 L.Ed.2d 389 (2007) (STEVENS, J., dissenting)
(noting that pre-emption "affects the allocation of powers among sovereigns").
"`[A]n agency literally has no power to act, let alone pre-empt the [law] of a
sovereign State, unless and until Congress confers power upon it.'" _New York
v. FERC,_ 535 U.S., at 18, 122 S.Ct. 1012 (quoting _Louisiana Pub. Serv.
Comm'n v. FCC,_ 476 U.S. 355, 374, 106 S.Ct. 1890, 90 L.Ed.2d 369 (1986)).
Thus, no agency or individual Member of Congress can pre-empt a State's
judgment by merely musing about goals or intentions not found within or
authorized by the statutory text. See _supra,_ at 1206-1208.

The Court's "purposes and objectives" pre-emption jurisprudence is also
problematic because it encourages an overly expansive reading of statutory
text. The Court's desire to divine the broader purposes of the statute before
it inevitably leads it to assume that Congress wanted to pursue those policies
"at all costs"even when the text reflects a different balance. See _Geier,
supra,_ at 904, 120 S.Ct. 1913 (STEVENS, J., dissenting) (finding no evidence
to support the notion that the DOT Secretary intended to advance the purposes
of the safety standard "at all costs"); Nelson, 86 Va. L.Rev., at 279-280. As
this Court has repeatedly noted, "`it frustrates rather than effectuates
legislative intent simplistically to assume that _whatever_ furthers the
statute's primary objective must be the law.'" _E.g.,_ _Norfolk Southern R.
Co. v. Sorrell,_ 549 U.S. 158, 171, 127 S.Ct. 799, 166 L.Ed.2d 638 (2007)
(quoting _Rodriguez v. United States,_ 480 U.S. 522, 526, 107 S.Ct. 1391, 94
L.Ed.2d 533 (1987) _(per curiam)_ ). Federal legislation is often the result
of compromise between legislators and "groups with marked but divergent
interests." See _Ragsdale v. Wolverine World Wide, Inc.,_ 535 U.S. 81, 93-94,
122 S.Ct. 1155, 152 L.Ed.2d 167 (2002). Thus, a statute's text might reflect a
compromise between parties who wanted to pursue a particular goal to different
extents. See, _e.g., ibid._ (noting that the Family and Medical Leave Act's
provision of only 12 work-weeks *1216 of yearly leave "was the result of
compromise" that must be given effect by courts); _Silkwood v. Kerr-McGee
Corp.,_ 464 U.S. 238, 257, 104 S.Ct. 615, 78 L.Ed.2d 443 (1984) (finding that
a state law was not pre-empted though it allegedly frustrated a primary
purpose of the Atomic Energy Act because the Act provided that its purpose was
to be furthered only "to the extent it is consistent `with the health and
safety of the public'" (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 2013(d) (1982 ed.))); see also
Manning, What Divides Textualists from Purposivists? 106 Colum. L.Rev. 70, 104
(2006) ("Legislators may compromise on a statute that does not fully address a
perceived mischief, accepting half a loaf to facilitate a law's enactment").
Therefore, there is no factual basis for the assumption underlying the Court's
"purposes and objectives" pre-emption jurisprudence that every policy
seemingly consistent with federal statutory text has necessarily been
authorized by Congress and warrants preemptive effect. Instead, our federal
system in general, and the Supremacy Clause in particular, accords pre-emptive
effect to only those policies that are actually authorized by and effectuated
through the statutory text.

## 3

The majority, while reaching the right conclusion in this case, demonstrates
once again how application of "purposes and objectives" pre-emption requires
inquiry into matters beyond the scope of proper judicial review. For example,
the majority relies heavily on Congress' failure "during the ... 70-year
history" of the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to enact an express pre-
emption provision that addresses approval of a drug label by the FDA. _Ante,_
at 1200. That "silence on the issue, coupled with [Congress'] certain
awareness of the prevalence of state tort litigation," the majority reasons,
is evidence that Congress did not intend for federal approval of drug labels
to pre-empt state tort judgments. _Ibid.;_ see also _ante,_ at 1199-1200
(construing from inaction that Congress "[e]vidently [had] determined that
widely available state rights of action provided appropriate relief").
Certainly, the absence of a statutory provision pre-empting all state tort
suits related to approved federal drug labels is pertinent to a finding that
such lawsuits are not pre-empted. But the relevance is in the fact that no
statute explicitly pre-empts the lawsuits, and not in any inferences that the
Court may draw from congressional silence about the motivations or policies
underlying Congress' failure to act. See _Brown v. Gardner,_ 513 U.S. 115,
121, 115 S.Ct. 552, 130 L.Ed.2d 462 (1994) ("[C]ongressional silence lacks
persuasive significance" (internal quotation marks omitted)); _O'Melveny &
Myers v. FDIC,_ 512 U.S. 79, 85, 114 S.Ct. 2048, 129 L.Ed.2d 67 (1994)
("[M]atters left unaddressed in [a comprehensive and detailed federal] scheme
are presumably left subject to the disposition provided by state law"); _Camps
Newfound,_ 520 U.S., at 616, 117 S.Ct. 1590 ("[O]ur pre-emption jurisprudence
explicitly rejects the notion that mere congressional silence on a particular
issue may be read as pre-empting state law").

In this case, the majority has concluded from silence that Congress believed
state lawsuits pose no obstacle to federal drug-approval objectives. See
_ante,_ at 1200. That is the required conclusion, but only because it is
compelled by the text of the relevant statutory and regulatory provisions, not
judicial suppositions about Congress' unstated goals. The fact that the Court
reaches the proper conclusion does not justify its speculation about the
reasons for congressional inaction. In this case, the Court has relied on the
perceived congressional policies underlying inaction *1217 to find that state
law is _not_ pre-empted. But once the Court shows a willingness to guess at
the intent underlying congressional inaction, the Court could just as easily
rely on its own perceptions regarding congressional inaction to give unduly
broad pre-emptive effect to federal law. See, _e.g.,_ _American Ins. Assn. v.
Garamendi,_ 539 U.S. 396, 401, 405-408, 429, 123 S.Ct. 2374, 156 L.Ed.2d 376
(2003) (finding that Congress' failure to pass legislation indicating that it
disagreed with the President's executive agreement supported, at least in
part, the Court's determination that the agreement pre-empted state law).
Either approach is illegitimate. Under the Supremacy Clause, state law is pre-
empted only by federal law "made in Pursuance" of the Constitution, Art. VI,
cl. 2not by extratextual considerations of the purposes underlying
congressional inaction. See _Hoffman v. Connecticut Dept. of Income
Maintenance,_ 492 U.S. 96, 104, 109 S.Ct. 2818, 106 L.Ed.2d 76 (1989)
(plurality opinion) (finding that policy arguments that "are not based in the
text of the statute... are not helpful"); _TVA v. Hill,_ 437 U.S. 153, 194, 98
S.Ct. 2279, 57 L.Ed.2d 117 (1978) ("Our individual appraisal of the wisdom or
unwisdom of a particular course consciously selected by the Congress is to be
put aside in the process of interpreting a statute"). Our role, then, is
merely "to interpret the language of the statute[s] enacted by Congress."
_Barnhart v. Sigmon Coal Co.,_ 534 U.S. 438, 461, 122 S.Ct. 941, 151 L.Ed.2d
908 (2002).

## III

The origins of this Court's "purposes and objectives" pre-emption
jurisprudence in _Hines,_ and its broad application in cases like _Geier,_
illustrate that this brand of the Court's pre-emption jurisprudence
facilitates freewheeling, extratextual, and broad evaluations of the "purposes
and objectives" embodied within federal law. This, in turn, leads to decisions
giving improperly broad pre-emptive effect to judicially manufactured
policies, rather than to the statutory text enacted by Congress pursuant to
the Constitution and the agency actions authorized thereby. Because such a
sweeping approach to pre-emption leads to the illegitimateand thus,
unconstitutionalinvalidation of state laws, I can no longer assent to a
doctrine that pre-empts state laws merely because they "stan[d] as an obstacle
to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives" of
federal law, _Hines,_ 312 U.S., at 67, 61 S.Ct. 399, as perceived by this
Court. I therefore respectfully concur only in the judgment.

Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and Justice SCALIA join,
dissenting.

This case illustrates that tragic facts make bad law. The Court holds that a
state tort jury, rather than the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), is
ultimately responsible for regulating warning labels for prescription drugs.
That result cannot be reconciled with _Geier v. American Honda Motor Co.,_ 529
U.S. 861, 120 S.Ct. 1913, 146 L.Ed.2d 914 (2000), or general principles of
conflict pre-emption. I respectfully dissent.

## I

The Court frames the question presented as a "narro[w]" onenamely, whether
Wyeth has a duty to provide "an adequate warning about using the IV-push
method" to administer Phenergan. _Ante,_ at 1194. But that ignores the
antecedent question of whothe FDA or a jury in Vermont has the authority and
responsibility for determining the "adequacy" of Phenergan's warnings.
Moreover, it is unclear how a "stronger" warning could have helped respondent,
see _ante,_ at 1199; after *1218 all, the physician's assistant who treated
her disregarded at least six separate warnings that are already on Phenergan's
labeling, so respondent would be hard pressed to prove that a seventh would
have made a difference.[1]

More to the point, the question presented by this case is not a "narrow" one,
and it does not concern whether Phenergan's label should bear a "stronger"
warning. Rather, the real issue is whether a state tort jury can countermand
the FDA's considered judgment that Phenergan's FDA-mandated warning label
renders its intravenous (IV) use "safe." Indeed, respondent's amended
complaint alleged that Phenergan is "not reasonably safe for intravenous
administration," App. 15, ¶ 6; respondent's attorney told the jury that
Phenergan's label should say, "`Do not use this drug intravenously,'" _id.,_
at 32; respondent's expert told the jury, "I think the drug should be labeled
`Not for IV use,'" _id.,_ at 59; and during his closing argument, respondent's
attorney told the jury, "Thank God we don't rely on the FDA to ... make the
safe[ty] decision. You will make the decision.... The FDA doesn't make the
decision, you do," _id.,_ at 211-212.[2]

Federal law, however, _does_ rely on the FDA to make safety determinations
like the one it made here. The FDA has long known about the risks associated
with IV push in general and its use to administer Phenergan in particular.
Whether wisely or not, the FDA has concludedover the course of extensive,
54-year-long regulatory proceedingsthat the drug is "safe" and "effective"
when used in accordance with its FDA-mandated labeling. The unfortunate fact
that respondent's healthcare providers ignored Phenergan's labeling may make
this an ideal medical-malpractice case.[3] But turning a common-law tort suit
into a "frontal assault" on the FDA's regulatory regime for drug labeling
upsets the well-settled meaning of the Supremacy Clause and our conflict pre-
emption jurisprudence. Brief for United States as _Amicus Curiae_ 21.

##  *1219 II

## A

To the extent that "[t]he purpose of Congress is the ultimate touchstone in
every pre-emption case," _Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr,_ 518 U.S. 470, 485, 116
S.Ct. 2240, 135 L.Ed.2d 700 (1996) (internal quotation marks omitted),
Congress made its "purpose" plain in authorizing the FDAnot state tort
juriesto determine when and under what circumstances a drug is "safe." "[T]he
process for approving new drugs is at least as rigorous as the premarket
approval process for medical devices," _Riegel v. Medtronic, Inc.,_ 552 U.S.
___, ___, 128 S.Ct. 999, 1018, 169 L.Ed.2d 892 (2008) (GINSBURG, J.,
dissenting), and we held that the latter pre-empted a state-law tort suit that
conflicted with the FDA's determination that a medical device was "safe,"
_id.,_ at ___, 128 S.Ct., at 1018 (opinion of the Court).

Under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FDCA), a drug manufacturer may
not market a new drug before first submitting a new drug application (NDA) to
the FDA and receiving the agency's approval. See 21 U.S.C. § 355(a). An NDA
must contain, among other things, "the labeling proposed to be used for such
drug," § 355(b)(1)(F), "full reports of investigations which have been made to
show whether or not such drug is safe for use and whether such drug is
effective in use," § 355(b)(1)(A), and "a discussion of why the benefits
exceed the risks [of the drug] under the conditions stated in the labeling,"
21 CFR § 314.50(d)(5)(viii) (2008). The FDA will approve an NDA only if the
agency finds, among other things, that the drug is "safe for use under the
conditions prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the proposed labeling
thereof," there is "substantial evidence that the drug will have the effect it
purports or is represented to have under the conditions of use prescribed,
recommended, or suggested in the proposed labeling thereof," and the proposed
labeling is not "false or misleading in any particular." 21 U.S.C. § 355(d).

After the FDA approves a drug, the manufacturer remains under an obligation to
investigate and report any adverse events associated with the drug, see 21 CFR
§ 314.80, and must periodically submit any new information that may affect the
FDA's previous conclusions about the safety, effectiveness, or labeling of the
drug, 21 U.S.C. § 355(k). If the FDA finds that the drug is not "safe" when
used in accordance with its labeling, the agency "shall" withdraw its approval
of the drug. § 355(e). The FDA also "shall" deem a drug "misbranded" if "it is
dangerous to health when used in the dosage or manner, or with the frequency
or duration prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the labeling thereof." §
352(j).

Thus, a drug's warning label "serves as the standard under which the FDA
determines whether a product is safe and effective." 50 Fed.Reg. 7470 (1985).
Labeling is "[t]he centerpiece of risk management," as it "communicates to
health care practitioners the agency's formal, authoritative conclusions
regarding the conditions under which the product can be used safely and
effectively." 71 Fed.Reg. 3934 (2006). The FDA has underscored the importance
it places on drug labels by promulgating comprehensive regulationsspanning an
entire part of the Code of Federal Regulations, see 21 CFR pt. 201, with seven
subparts and 70 separate sectionsthat set forth drug manufacturers' labeling
obligations. Under those regulations, the FDA must be satisfied that a drug's
warning label contains, among other things, "a summary of the essential
scientific information needed for the safe and effective use of the drug," §
201.56(1), including a *1220 description of "clinically significant adverse
reactions," "other potential safety hazards," "limitations in use imposed by
them, ... and steps that should be taken if they occur," § 201.57(c)(6)(i).
Neither the FDCA nor its implementing regulations suggest that juries may
second-guess the FDA's labeling decisions.

## B

## 1

Where the FDA determines, in accordance with its statutory mandate, that a
drug is on balance "safe," our conflict pre-emption cases prohibit any State
from countermanding that determination. See, _e.g.,_ _Buckman Co. v.
Plaintiffs' Legal Comm.,_ 531 U.S. 341, 348, 121 S.Ct. 1012, 148 L.Ed.2d 854
(2001) (after the FDA has struck "a somewhat delicate balance of statutory
objectives" and determined that petitioner submitted a valid application to
manufacture a medical device, a State may not use common law to negate it);
_International Paper Co. v. Ouellette,_ 479 U.S. 481, 494, 107 S.Ct. 805, 93
L.Ed.2d 883 (1987) (after the EPA has struck "the balance of public and
private interests so carefully addressed by" the federal permitting regime for
water pollution, a State may not use nuisance law to "upse[t]" it); _Chicago &
North Western Transp. Co. v. Kalo Brick & Tile Co.,_ 450 U.S. 311, 321, 101
S.Ct. 1124, 67 L.Ed.2d 258 (1981) (after the Interstate Commerce Commission
has struck a "balance" between competing interests in permitting the
abandonment of a railroad line, a State may not use statutory or common law to
negate it).

Thus, as the Court itself recognizes, it is irrelevant in conflict pre-emption
cases whether Congress "enacted an express pre-emption provision at some point
during the FDCA's 70-year history." _Ante,_ at 1200; see also _Geier,_ 529
U.S., at 869, 120 S.Ct. 1913 (holding the absence of an express pre-emption
clause "does _not_ bar the ordinary working of conflict pre-emption
principles"). Rather, the ordinary principles of conflict pre-emption turn
solely on whether a State has upset the regulatory balance struck by the
federal agency. _Id.,_ at 884-885, 120 S.Ct. 1913; see also _Chicago & North
Western Transp. Co., supra,_ at 317, 101 S.Ct. 1124 (describing conflict pre-
emption as "a two-step process of first ascertaining the construction of the
[federal and state laws] and then determining the constitutional question
whether they are actually in conflict" (internal quotation marks omitted)).

## 2

A faithful application of this Court's conflict pre-emption cases compels the
conclusion that the FDA's 40-year-long effort to regulate the safety and
efficacy of Phenergan pre-empts respondent's tort suit. Indeed, that result
follows directly from our conclusion in _Geier._

_Geier_ arose under the National Traffic and Motor Safety Vehicle Act of 1966,
which directs the Secretary of the Department of Transportation (DOT) to
"establish by order ... motor vehicle safety standards," 15 U.S.C. § 1392(a)
(1988 ed.), which are defined as "minimum standard[s] for motor vehicle
performance, or motor vehicle equipment performance," § 1391(2). Acting
pursuant to that statutory mandate, the Secretary of Transportation
promulgated Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 208, which required car
manufacturers to include passive restraint systems ( _i.e.,_ devices that work
automatically to protect occupants from injury during a collision) in a
certain percentage of their cars built in or after 1987. See 49 CFR § 571.208
(1999). Standard 208 did not require installation of any particular type of
passive restraint; instead, it gave manufacturers the option to install
automatic *1221 seatbelts, airbags, or any other suitable technology that they
might develop, provided the restraint(s) met the performance requirements
specified in the rule. _Ibid._

Alexis Geier drove her 1987 Honda Accord into a tree, and although she was
wearing her seatbelt, she nonetheless suffered serious injuries. She then sued
Honda under state tort law, alleging that her car was negligently and
defectively designed because it lacked a driver's-side airbag. She argued that
Congress had empowered the Secretary to set only "minimum standard[s]" for
vehicle safety. 15 U.S.C. § 1391(2). She also emphasized that the National
Traffic and Motor Safety Vehicle Act contains a saving clause, which provides
that "[c]ompliance with any Federal motor vehicle safety standard issued under
this subchapter does not exempt any person from any liability under common
law." § 1397(k).

Notwithstanding the statute's saving clause, and notwithstanding the fact that
Congress gave the Secretary authority to set only "minimum" safety standards,
we held Geier's state tort suit pre-empted. In reaching that result, we relied
heavily on the view of the Secretary of Transportationexpressed in an
_amicus_ briefthat Standard 208 "`embodies the Secretary's policy judgment
that safety would best be promoted if manufacturers installed _alternative_
protection systems in their fleets rather than one particular system in every
car.'" 529 U.S., at 881, 120 S.Ct. 1913 (quoting Brief for United States as
_Amicus Curiae,_ O.T.1999, No. 98-1811, p. 25). Because the Secretary
determined that a menu of alternative technologies was "safe," the doctrine of
conflict pre-emption barred Geier's efforts to deem some of those federally
approved alternatives "unsafe" under state tort law.

The same rationale applies here. Through Phenergan's label, the FDA offered
medical professionals a menu of federally approved, "safe" and "effective"
alternativesincluding IV pushfor administering the drug. Through a state
tort suit, respondent attempted to deem IV push "unsafe" and "ineffective." To
be sure, federal law does not prohibit Wyeth from contraindicating IV push,
just as federal law did not prohibit Honda from installing airbags in all its
cars. But just as we held that States may not compel the latter, so, too, are
States precluded from compelling the former. See also _Fidelity Fed. Sav. &
Loan Assn. v. de la Cuesta,_ 458 U.S. 141, 155, 102 S.Ct. 3014, 73 L.Ed.2d 664
(1982) ("The conflict does not evaporate because the [agency's] regulation
simply permits, but does not compel," the action forbidden by state law). If
anything, a finding of pre-emption is even more appropriate here because the
FDCAunlike the National Traffic and Motor Safety Vehicle Actcontains no
evidence that Congress intended the FDA to set only "minimum standards," and
the FDCA does not contain a saving clause.[4] See also _ante,_ at *1222 1200
(conceding Congress' "silence" on the issue).

## III

In its attempt to evade _Geier_ 's applicability to this case, the Court
commits both factual and legal errors. First, as a factual matter, it is
demonstrably untrue that the FDA failed to consider (and strike a "balance"
between) the specific costs and benefits associated with IV push. Second, as a
legal matter, _Geier_ does not stand for the legal propositions espoused by
the dissenters (and specifically rejected by the majority) in that case.
Third, drug labeling by jury verdict undermines both our broader pre-emption
jurisprudence and the broader workability of the federal drug-labeling regime.

## A

Phenergan's warning label has been subject to the FDA's strict regulatory
oversight since the 1950's. For at least the last 34 years, the FDA has
focused specifically on whether IV-push administration of Phenergan is "safe"
and "effective" when performed in accordance with Phenergan's label. The
agency's ultimate decisionto retain IV push as one means for administering
Phenergan, albeit subject to stringent warningsis reflected in the plain text
of Phenergan's label (sometimes in boldfaced font and all-capital letters).
And the record contains ample evidence that the FDA specifically considered
and reconsidered the strength of Phenergan's IV-push-related warnings in light
of new scientific and medical data. The majority's factual assertions to the
contrary are mistaken.

## 1

The FDA's focus on IV push as a means of administering Phenergan dates back at
least to 1975. In August of that year, several representatives from both the
FDA and Wyeth met to discuss Phenergan's warning label. At that meeting, the
FDA specifically proposed "that Phenergan Injection should not be used in
Tubex & reg;." 2 Record 583, 586 (Plaintiff's Trial Exh. 17, Internal
Correspondence from W.E. Langeland to File (Sept. 5, 1975) (hereinafter 1975
Memo)). "Tubex" is a syringe system used exclusively for IV push. See App. 43.
An FDA official explained that the agency's concerns arose from medical-
malpractice lawsuits involving IV push of the drug, see 1975 Memo 586, and
that the FDA was aware of "5 cases involving amputation where the drug had
been administered by Tubex together with several additional cases involving
necrosis," _id.,_ at 586-587. Rather than contraindicating Phenergan for IV
push, however, the agency and Wyeth agreed "that there was a need for better
instruction regarding the problems of intraarterial injection." _Id.,_ at 587.

The next year, the FDA convened an advisory committee to study, among other
things, the risks associated with the Tubex system and IV push. App. 294. At
the conclusion of its study, the committee recommended an additional IV-push-
specific warning for Phenergan's label, see _ibid.,_ but did not recommend
eliminating IV push from the drug label altogether. In response to the
committee's recommendations, the FDA instructed Wyeth to make several changes
to strengthen Phenergan's label, including the addition of upper case warnings
related to IV push. See _id.,_ at 279-280, 282-283.

*1223 In 1987, the FDA directed Wyeth to amend its label to include the following text:

> "`[1] When used intravenously, [Phenergan] should be given in a
> concentration no greater than 25 mg/ml and at a rate not to exceed 25
> mg/minute. [2] Injection through a properly running intravenous infusion may
> enhance the possibility of detecting arterial placement.'" _Id.,_ at
> 311-312.

The first of the two quoted sentences refers specifically to IV push; as
respondent's medical expert testified at trial, the label's recommended rate
of administration (not to exceed 25 mg per minute) refers to "IV push, as
opposed to say being in a bag and dripped over a couple of hours." _Id.,_ at
52. The second of the two quoted sentences refers to IV drip. See _id.,_ at
15-16 (emphasizing that a "running IV" is the same thing as "IV drip").

In its 1987 labeling order, the FDA cited voluminous materials to "suppor[t]"
its new and stronger warnings related to IV push and the preferability of IV
drip.[5] _Id.,_ at 313. One of those articles specifically discussed the
relative advantages and disadvantages of IV drip compared to IV push, as well
as the costs and benefits of administering Phenergan via IV push.[6] The FDA
also cited published case reports from the 1960's of gangrene caused by the
intra-arterial injection of Phenergan,[7] and the FDA instructed Wyeth to
amend Phenergan's label in accordance with the latest medical research.[8] The
FDA also studied drugs similar to Phenergan and cited numerous cautionary
articlesone of which urged the agency to consider contraindicating *1224 such
drugs for IV use altogether.[9]

In "support" of its labeling order, the FDA also cited numerous articles that
singled out the inner crook of the elbowknown as the "antecubital fossa" in
the medical communitywhich is both a commonly used injection site, see _id.,_
at 70 (noting that respondent's injection was pushed into "the antecubital
space"), and a universally recognized high-risk area for inadvertent intra-
arterial injections. One of the articles explained:

> "Because of the numerous superficial positions the ulnar artery might
> occupy, it has often been entered during attempted venipuncture [of the
> antecubital fossa].... However, the brachial and the radial arteries might
> also be quite superficial in the elbow region.... The arterial variations of
> the arm, especially in and about the cubital fossa, are common and numerous.
> If venipuncture must be performed in this area, a higher index of suspicion
> must be maintained to forestall misdirected injections." Stone & Donnelly,
> The Accidental Intra-arterial Injection of Thiopental, 22 Anesthesiology
> 995, 996 (1961) (footnote omitted; cited in App. 315, no. 20).[10]

*1225 Based on this and other research, the FDA ordered Wyeth to include a specific warning related to the use of the antecubital space for IV push.[11]

## 2

When respondent was injured in 2000, Phenergan's label specifically addressed
IV push in several passages (sometimes in lieu of and sometimes in addition to
those discussed above). For example, the label warned of the risks of intra-
arterial injection associated with "aspiration," which is a technique used
only in conjunction with IV push.[12] The label also cautioned against the use
of "syringes with rigid plungers," App. 390, which are used only to administer
the drug via IV push. As respondent's medical expert testified at trial, "by
talking plungers and rigid needles, that's the way you do it, to push it with
the plunger." _Id.,_ at 53 (testimony of Dr. John Matthew). Moreover,
Phenergan's 2000 label devoted almost a full page to discussing the "Tubex
system," see _id.,_ at 391, which, as noted above, is used only to administer
the drug via IV push.

While Phenergan's label very clearly authorized the use of IV push, it also
made clear that IV push is the delivery method of last resort. The label
specified that "[t]he preferred parenteral route of administration is by deep
intramuscular injection." _Id.,_ at 390. If an intramuscular injection is
ineffective, then "it is usually preferable to inject [Phenergan] through the
tubing of an intravenous infusion set that is known to be functioning
satisfactorily." _Ibid._ See also _id.,_ at 50-51 (testimony of respondent's
medical expert, Dr. John Matthew) (conceding that the best way to determine
that an IV set is functioning satisfactorily is to use IV drip). Finally, if
for whatever reason a medical professional chooses to use IV push, he or she
is on notice that "INADVERTENT INTRA-ARTERIAL INJECTION CAN RESULT IN GANGRENE
OF THE AFFECTED EXTREMITY." _Id.,_ at 391; see also _id.,_ at 390 ("Under no
circumstances should Phenergan Injection be given by intra-arterial injection
due to the likelihood of severe arteriospasm and the possibility of resultant
gangrene").

Phenergan's label also directs medical practitioners to choose veins wisely
when using IV push:

> "Due to the close proximity of arteries and veins in the areas most commonly
> used for intravenous injection, extreme care should be exercised to avoid
> perivascular extravasation or inadvertent intra-arterial injection. Reports
> compatible with inadvertent intra-arterial injection of Phenergan Injection,
> usually in conjunction with other drugs intended for intravenous use,
> suggest that pain, severe chemical irritation, severe spasm of distal
> vessels, and resultant gangrene requiring amputation are likely under such
> circumstances." _Ibid._

Thus, it is demonstrably untrue that, as of 2000, Phenergan's "labeling did
not contain a specific warning about the risks of *1226 IV-push
administration." _Ante,_ at 1192. And whatever else might be said about the
extensive medical authorities and case reports that the FDA cited in "support"
of its approval of IV-push administration of Phenergan, it cannot be said that
the FDA "paid no more than passing attention to" IV push, _ante,_ at 1193; nor
can it be said that the FDA failed to weigh its costs and benefits, Brief for
Respondent 50.

## 3

For her part, respondent does not dispute the FDA's conclusion that IV push
has certain benefits. At trial, her medical practitioners testified that they
used IV push in order to help her "in a swift and timely way" when she showed
up at the hospital for the second time in one day complaining of "intractable"
migraines, "terrible pain," inability to "bear light or sound," sleeplessness,
hours-long spasms of "retching" and "vomiting," and when "every possible"
alternative treatment had "failed." App. 40 (testimony of Dr. John Matthew);
_id.,_ at 103, 106, 109 (testimony of physician's assistant Jessica Fisch).

Rather than disputing the benefits of IV push, respondent complains that the
FDA and Wyeth underestimated its costs (and hence did not provide sufficient
warnings regarding its risks). But when the FDA mandated that Phenergan's
label read, "INADVERTENT INTRA-ARTERIAL INJECTION CAN RESULT IN GANGRENE OF
THE AFFECTED EXTREMITY," _id.,_ at 391, and when the FDA required Wyeth to
warn that "[u]nder no circumstances should Phenergan Injection be given by
intra-arterial injection," _id.,_ at 390, the agency could reasonably assume
that medical professionals would take care not to inject Phenergan intra-
arterially. See also 71 Fed.Reg. 3934 (noting that a drug's warning label
"communicates to health care practitioners the agency's formal, authoritative
conclusions regarding the conditions under which the product can be used
safely and effectively"). Unfortunately, the physician's assistant who treated
respondent in this case disregarded Phenergan's label and pushed the drug into
the single spot on her arm that is _most_ likely to cause an inadvertent
intra-arterial injection.

As noted above, when the FDA approved Phenergan's label, it was textbook
medical knowledge that the "antecubital fossa" creates a high risk of
inadvertent intra-arterial injection, given the close proximity of veins and
arteries. See _supra,_ at 1224-1225; see also The Lippincott Manual of Nursing
Practice 99 (7th ed.2001) (noting, in a red-text "NURSING ALERT," that the
antecubital fossa is "not recommended" for administering dangerous drugs, "due
to the potential for extravasation").[13] According to the physician's
assistant who injured respondent, however, "[i]t never crossed my mind" that
an antecubital injection of Phenergan could hit an artery. App. 110; see also
_ibid._ ("[It] just wasn't something that I was aware of at the time").
Oblivious to the risks emphasized in Phenergan's warnings, the physician's
assistant pushed a double dose of the drug into an antecubital artery over the
course of "[p]robably about three to four minutes," _id.,_ at 111; _id.,_ at
105, notwithstanding respondent's complaints of a "`burn[ing]'" sensation that
she subsequently described as "`one of the most extreme pains that I've ever
felt,'" _id.,_ at *1227 110, 180-181. And when asked why she ignored
Phenergan's label and failed to stop pushing the drug after respondent
complained of burning pains, the physician's assistant explained that it would
have been "just crazy" to "worr[y] about an [intra-arterial] injection" under
the circumstances, _id.,_ at 111.

The FDA, however, did not think that the risks associated with IV
pushespecially in the antecubital spacewere "just crazy." That is why
Phenergan's label so clearly warns against them.

## B

Given the "balance" that the FDA struck between the costs and benefits of
administering Phenergan via IV push, _Geier_ compels the pre-emption of tort
suits (like this one) that would upset that balance. The contrary conclusion
requires turning yesterday's dissent into today's majority opinion.

First, the Court denies the existence of a federal-state conflict in this case
because Vermont merely countermanded the FDA's determination that IV push is
"safe" when performed in accordance with Phenergan's warning label; the Court
concludes that there is no conflict because Vermont did not "mandate a
particular" label as a "replacement" for the one that the jury nullified, and
because the State stopped short of altogether "contraindicating IV-push
administration." _Ante,_ at 1194. But as we emphasized in _Geier_ (over the
dissent's assertions to the contrary), the degree of a State's intrusion upon
federal law is irrelevantthe Supremacy Clause applies with equal force to a
state tort law that merely countermands a federal safety determination and to
a state law that altogether prohibits car manufacturers from selling cars
without airbags. Compare 529 U.S., at 881-882, 120 S.Ct. 1913, with _id.,_ at
902, 120 S.Ct. 1913 (STEVENS, J., dissenting). Indeed, as recently as last
Term, we held that the Supremacy Clause pre-empts a "[s]tate tort law that
requires a manufacturer's catheters to be safer, but hence less effective,
than the model the FDA has approved...." _Riegel,_ 552 U.S., at ___, 128
S.Ct., at 1008. It did not matter there that the State stopped short of
altogether prohibiting the use of FDA-approved cathetersjust as it does not
matter here that Vermont stopped short of altogether prohibiting an FDA-
approved method for administering Phenergan. See also _Lohr,_ 518 U.S., at
504, 116 S.Ct. 2240 (BREYER, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment) (noting it would be an "anomalous result" if pre-emption applied
differently to a state tort suit premised on the inadequacy of the FDA's
safety regulations and a state law that specifically prohibited an FDA-
approved design).

Second, the Court today distinguishes _Geier_ because the FDA articulated its
pre-emptive intent "without offering States or other interested parties notice
or opportunity for comment." _Ante,_ at 1201; see also _ante,_ at 1203. But
the _Geier_ Court specifically rejected the argument (again made by the
dissenters in that case) that conflict pre-emption is appropriate only where
the agency expresses its pre-emptive intent through notice-and-comment
rulemaking. Compare 529 U.S., at 885, 120 S.Ct. 1913 ("To insist on a specific
expression of agency intent to pre-empt, made after notice-and-comment
rulemaking, would be in certain cases to tolerate conflicts that an agency,
and therefore Congress, is most unlikely to have intended. The dissent, as we
have said, apparently welcomes that result .... We do not"), with _id.,_ at
908-910, 120 S.Ct. 1913 (STEVENS, J., dissenting) (emphasizing that "we
generally expect an administrative regulation to declare any intention to
*1228 pre-empt state law with some specificity," and that "[t]his expectation
... serves to ensure that States will be able to have a dialog with agencies
regarding pre-emption decisions _ex ante_ through the normal notice-and-
comment procedures of the Administrative Procedure Act" (internal quotation
marks omitted)). Indeed, pre-emption is arguably more appropriate here than in
_Geier_ because the FDA (unlike the DOT) declared its pre-emptive intent in
the Federal Register. See 71 Fed.Reg. 3933-3936. Yet the majority dismisses
the FDA's published preamble as "inherently suspect," _ante,_ at 1201, and an
afterthought that is entitled to "no weight," _ante,_ at 1204. Compare _Lohr,
supra,_ at 506, 116 S.Ct. 2240 (opinion of BREYER, J.) (emphasizing that the
FDA has a "special understanding of the likely impact of both state and
federal requirements, as well as an understanding of whether (or the extent to
which) state requirements may interfere with federal objectives," and that
"[t]he FDA can translate these understandings into particularized pre-emptive
intentions ... through statements in `regulations, preambles, interpretive
statements, and responses to comments'").

Third, the Court distinguishes _Geier_ because the DOT's regulation "bear[s]
the force of law," whereas the FDA's preamble does not. _Ante,_ at 1203; see
also _ante,_ at 1200. But it is irrelevant that the FDA's preamble does not
"bear the force of law" because the FDA's labeling decisions surely do. See 21
U.S.C. § 355. It is well within the FDA's discretion to make its labeling
decisions through administrative adjudications rather than through less-formal
and less-flexible rulemaking proceedings, see _SEC v. Chenery Corp.,_ 332 U.S.
194, 67 S.Ct. 1575, 91 L.Ed. 1995 (1947), and we have never previously held
that our pre-emption analysis turns on the agency's choice of the latter over
the former. Moreover, it cannot be said that _Geier_ 's outcome hinged on the
agency's choice to promulgate a rule. See _ante,_ at 1200, 1203. The _Geier_
Court reliedagain over the dissenters' protestationson materials other than
the Secretary's regulation to explain the conflict between state and federal
law. Compare 529 U.S., at 881, 120 S.Ct. 1913, with _id.,_ at 899-900, 120
S.Ct. 1913 (STEVENS, J., dissenting), and _ante,_ at 1204 (BREYER, J.,
concurring).

Fourth, the Court sandwiches its discussion of _Geier_ between the
"presumption against pre-emption," _ante,_ at 1200, and heavy emphasis on "the
longstanding coexistence of state and federal law and the FDA's traditional
recognition of state-law remedies," _ante,_ at 1203. But the _Geier_ Court
specifically rejected the argument (again made by the dissenters in that case)
that the "presumption against pre-emption" is relevant to the conflict pre-
emption analysis. See 529 U.S., at 906-907, 120 S.Ct. 1913 (STEVENS, J.,
dissenting) ("[T]he Court simply ignores the presumption [against pre-
emption]"). Rather than invoking such a "presumption," the Court emphasized
that it was applying "ordinary," "longstanding," and "experience-proved
principles of conflict pre-emption." _Id.,_ at 874, 120 S.Ct. 1913. Under
these principles, the sole question is whether there is an "actual conflict"
between state and federal law; if so, then pre-emption follows automatically
by operation of the Supremacy Clause. _Id.,_ at 871-872, 120 S.Ct. 1913. See
also _Buckman,_ 531 U.S., at 347-348, 121 S.Ct. 1012 ("[P]etitioner's dealings
with the FDA were prompted by [federal law], and the very subject matter of
petitioner's statements [to the FDA] were dictated by [federal law].
Accordinglyand in contrast to situations implicating `federalism concerns and
the historic primacy of state regulation of matters of health and safety'no
presumption *1229 against pre-emption obtains in this case" (citation
omitted)).[14]

Finally, the _Geier_ Court went out of its way to emphasize (yet again over
the dissenters' objections) that it placed "some weight" on the DOT's _amicus_
brief, which explained the agency's regulatory objectives and the effects of
state tort suits on the federal regulatory regime. 529 U.S., at 883, 120 S.Ct.
1913; compare _id.,_ at 910-911, 120 S.Ct. 1913 (STEVENS, J., dissenting)
(criticizing the majority for "uph[olding] a regulatory claim of frustration-
of-purposes implied conflict pre-emption based on nothing more than an _ex
post_ administrative litigating position and inferences from regulatory
history and final commentary"). See also _Lohr,_ 518 U.S., at 496, 116 S.Ct.
2240 (recognizing that the FDA is "uniquely qualified" to explain whether
state law conflicts with the FDA's objectives). Yet today, the FDA's
explanation of the conflict between state tort suits and the federal labeling
regime, set forth in the agency's _amicus_ brief, is not even mentioned in the
Court's opinion. Instead of relying on the FDA's explanation of its own
regulatory purposes, the Court relies on a decade-old and now-repudiated
statement, which the majority finds preferable. See _ante,_ at 1201-1202,
1203, n. 13. Cf. _Riegel,_ 552 U.S., at ___, 128 S.Ct., at 1010 (noting that
"the agency's earlier position (which the dissent describes at some length and
finds preferable) is ... compromised, indeed deprived of all claim to
deference, by the fact that it is no longer the agency's position" (citation
omitted)); _Altria Group, Inc. v. Good,_ 555 U.S. ___, ___, 129 S.Ct. 538,
549-550, ___ L.Ed.2d ___ (2008) (rejecting petitioners' reliance on the pre-
emptive effect of the agency's "longstanding policy" because it is
inconsistent with the agency's current one). And Justice BREYER suggests that
state tort suits may "help the [FDA]," _ante,_ at 1204 (concurring opinion),
notwithstanding the FDA's insistence that state tort suits will "disrupt the
agency's balancing of health risks and benefits," Brief for United States as
_Amicus Curiae_ 9.

_Geier_ does not countenance the use of state tort suits to second-guess the
FDA's labeling decisions. And the Court's contrary conclusion has potentially
far-reaching consequences.

## C

By their very nature, juries are ill-equipped to perform the FDA's cost-
benefit-balancing function. As we explained in _Riegel,_ juries tend to focus
on the risk of a *1230 particular product's design or warning label that
arguably contributed to a particular plaintiff's injury, not on the overall
benefits of that design or label; "the patients who reaped those benefits are
not represented in court." 552 U.S., at ___, 128 S.Ct., at 1008. Indeed,
patients like respondent are the only ones whom tort juries ever see, and for
a patient like respondentwho has already suffered a tragic
accidentPhenergan's risks are no longer a matter of probabilities and
potentialities.

In contrast, the FDA has the benefit of the long view. Its drug-approval
determinations consider the interests of all potential users of a drug,
including "those who would suffer without new medical [products]" if juries in
all 50 States were free to contradict the FDA's expert determinations. _Id.,_
at ___, 128 S.Ct., at 1009. And the FDA conveys its warnings with one voice,
rather than whipsawing the medical community with 50 (or more) potentially
conflicting ones. After today's ruling, however, parochialism may prevail.

The problem is well illustrated by the labels borne by "vesicant" drugs, many
of which are used for chemotherapy. As a class, vesicants are much more
dangerous than drugs like Phenergan,[15] but the vast majority of vesicant
labelslike Phenergan'seither allow or do not disallow IV push. See Appendix,
_infra._ Because vesicant extravasation can have devastating consequences, and
because the potentially lifesaving benefits of these drugs offer hollow solace
to the victim of such a tragedy, a jury's cost-benefit analysis in a
particular case may well differ from the FDA's.

For example, consider Mustargen (mechlorethamine HCl)the injectable form of
mustard gaswhich can be used as an anticancer drug. Mustargen's FDA-approved
label warns in several places that "This drug is HIGHLY TOXIC."[16] Indeed,
the drug is so highly toxic:

> "Should accidental eye contact occur, copious irrigation for at least 15
> minutes with water, normal saline or a balanced salt ophthalmic irrigating
> solution should be instituted immediately, followed by prompt ophthalmologic
> consultation. Should accidental skin contact occur, the affected part must
> be irrigated immediately with copious amounts of water, for at least 15
> minutes while removing contaminated clothing and shoes, followed by 2%
> sodium thiosulfate solution. Medical attention should be sought immediately.
> Contaminated clothing should be destroyed."[17]

Yet when it comes to administering this highly toxic drug, the label provides
that "the drug may be injected _directly into any suitable vein,_ [but] it is
injected preferably into the rubber or plastic tubing of a flowing intravenous
infusion set. This reduces the possibility of severe local reactions due to
extravasation or high concentration of the drug." (Emphasis added.) Similarly,
the FDA-approved labels for other powerful chemotherapeutic
vesicantsincluding *1231 Dactinomycin, Oxaliplatin, Vinblastine, and
Vincristinespecifically allow IV push, notwithstanding their devastating
effects when extravasated.

The fact that the labels for such drugs allow IV push is strikingboth because
vesicants are much more dangerous than Phenergan, and also because they are so
frequently extravasated, see Boyle & Engelking, Vesicant Extravasation: Myths
and Realities, 22 Oncology Nursing Forum 57, 58 (1995) (arguing that the rate
of extravasation is "considerably higher" than 6.4% of all vesicant
administrations). Regardless of the FDA's reasons for not contraindicating IV
push for these drugs, it is odd (to say the least) that a jury in Vermont can
now order for Phenergan what the FDA has chosen not to order for mustard
gas.[18]

## * * *

To be sure, state tort suits can peacefully coexist with the FDA's labeling
regime, and they have done so for decades. _Ante,_ at 1199-1200. But this case
is far from peaceful coexistence. The FDA told Wyeth that Phenergan's label
renders its use "safe." But the State of Vermont, through its tort law, said:
"Not so."

The state-law rule at issue here is squarely pre-empted. Therefore, I would
reverse the judgment of the Supreme Court of Vermont.

## APPENDIX TO OPINION OF ALITO, J.

    
    
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Vesicant[1]         IV Push[2]
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Dactinomycin      Specifically allowed
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Mechlorethamine
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    (Mustargen)       Specifically allowed
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Oxaliplatin       Specifically allowed
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Vinblastine       Specifically allowed
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Vincristine       Specifically allowed
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Bleomycin         Neither mentioned nor prohibited
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Carboplatin       Neither mentioned nor prohibited
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Dacarbazine       Neither mentioned nor prohibited
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Mitomycin         Neither mentioned nor prohibited
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Carmustine        Not prohibited; IV drip recommended
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Cisplatin         Not prohibited; IV drip recommended
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Epirubicin        Not prohibited; IV drip recommended
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Etoposide         Not prohibited; IV drip recommended
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Ifosfamide        Not prohibited; IV drip recommended
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Mitoxantrone      Not prohibited; IV drip recommended
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Paclitaxel        Not prohibited; IV drip recommended
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Teniposide        Not prohibited; IV drip recommended
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Vinorelbine       Not prohibited; IV drip recommended
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Daunorubicin      Prohibited
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    Doxorubicin       Prohibited
    ----------------------------------------------------------
    

## NOTES

[1] The warning for "Inadvertent Intra-arterial Injection" stated: "Due to the
close proximity of arteries and veins in the areas most commonly used for
intravenous injection, extreme care should be exercised to avoid perivascular
extravasation or inadvertent intra-arterial injection. Reports compatible with
inadvertent intra-arterial injection of Phenergan Injection, usually in
conjunction with other drugs intended for intravenous use, suggest that pain,
severe chemical irritation, severe spasm of distal vessels, and resultant
gangrene requiring amputation are likely under such circumstances. Intravenous
injection was intended in all the cases reported but perivascular
extravasation or arterial placement of the needle is now suspect. There is no
proven successful management of this condition after it occurs.... Aspiration
of dark blood does not preclude intra-arterial needle placement, because blood
is discolored upon contact with Phenergan Injection. Use of syringes with
rigid plungers or of small bore needles might obscure typical arterial
backflow if this is relied upon alone. When used intravenously, Phenergan
Injection should be given in a concentration no greater than 25 mg per mL and
at a rate not to exceed 25 mg per minute. When administering any irritant drug
intravenously, it is usually preferable to inject it through the tubing of an
intravenous infusion set that is known to be functioning satisfactorily. In
the event that a patient complains of pain during intended intravenous
injection of Phenergan Injection, the injection should be stopped immediately
to provide for evaluation of possible arterial placement or perivascular
extravasation." App. 390.

[2] The dissent nonetheless suggests that physician malpractice was the
exclusive cause of Levine's injury. See, _e.g., post,_ at 1217 (opinion of
ALITO, J.) ("[I]t is unclear how a `stronger' warning could have helped
respondent"); _post,_ at 1225-1227 (suggesting that the physician assistant's
conduct was the sole cause of the injury). The dissent's frustration with the
jury's verdict does not put the merits of Levine's tort claim before us, nor
does it change the question we must decidewhether federal law pre-empts
Levine's state-law claims.

[3] Wyeth argues that the presumption against pre-emption should not apply to
this case because the Federal Government has regulated drug labeling for more
than a century. That argument misunderstands the principle: We rely on the
presumption because respect for the States as "independent sovereigns in our
federal system" leads us to assume that "Congress does not cavalierly pre-empt
state-law causes of action." _Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr,_ 518 U.S. 470, 485, 116
S.Ct. 2240, 135 L.Ed.2d 700 (1996). The presumption thus accounts for the
historic presence of state law but does not rely on the absence of federal
regulation.

For its part, the dissent argues that the presumption against pre-emption
should not apply to claims of implied conflict pre-emption at all, _post,_ at
1228, but this Court has long held to the contrary. See, _e.g.,_ _California
v. ARC America Corp.,_ 490 U.S. 93, 101-102, 109 S.Ct. 1661, 104 L.Ed.2d 86
(1989); _Hillsborough County v. Automated Medical Laboratories, Inc.,_ 471
U.S. 707, 716, 105 S.Ct. 2371, 85 L.Ed.2d 714 (1985); see also _Rush
Prudential HMO, Inc. v. Moran,_ 536 U.S. 355, 387, 122 S.Ct. 2151, 153 L.Ed.2d
375 (2002). The dissent's reliance on _Buckman Co. v. Plaintiffs' Legal
Comm.,_ 531 U.S. 341, 121 S.Ct. 1012, 148 L.Ed.2d 854 (2001), see _post,_ at
1229, and n. 14, is especially curious, as that case involved state-law fraud-
on-the-agency claims, and the Court distinguished state regulation of health
and safety as matters to which the presumption does apply. See 531 U.S., at
347-348, 121 S.Ct. 1012.

[4] Levine also introduced evidence that Pfizer had withdrawn Vistaril,
another antinausea drug, from intravenous use several decades earlier because
its intravenous injection had resulted in gangrene and amputations. See App.
79.

[5] The record would not, in any event, support such an argument. In 1988,
Wyeth did propose different language for Phenergan's warning about intra-
arterial injection, adapted from revisions the FDA proposed in 1987. See App.
339-341, 311-312. When the FDA approved Wyeth's application, it instructed
Wyeth to retain the wording in its current label. During the trial court
proceedings, Levine indicated that the language proposed in 1988 would have
more strongly warned against IV-push administration. But the trial court and
the Vermont Supreme Court found that the 1988 warning did not differ in any
material respect from the FDA-approved warning. See ___ Vt. ___, ___, 944 A.2d
179, 189 (2006) ("Simply stated, the proposed warning was different, but not
stronger. It was also no longer or more prominent than the original warning
..."); App. 248-250. Indeed, the United States concedes that the FDA did not
regard the proposed warning as substantively different: "[I]t appears the FDA
viewed the change as non-substantive and rejected it for formatting reasons."
Brief for United States as _Amicus Curiae_ 25; see also ___ Vt., at ___, 944
A.2d, at 189.

[6] The dissent's suggestion that the FDA intended to prohibit Wyeth from
strengthening its warning does not fairly reflect the record. The dissent
creatively paraphrases a few FDA ordersfor instance by conflating warnings
about IV-push administration and intra-arterial injection, see, _e.g., post,_
at 1222, 1223-1224, 1225-1226to suggest greater agency attention to the
question, and it undertakes a study of Phenergan's labeling that is more
elaborate than any FDA order. But even the dissent's account does not support
the conclusion that the FDA would have prohibited Wyeth from adding a stronger
warning pursuant to the CBE regulation.

[7] Although the first version of the bill that became the FDCA would have
provided a federal cause of action for damages for injured consumers, see H.R.
6110, 73d Cong., 1st Sess., § 25 (1933) (as introduced), witnesses testified
that such a right of action was unnecessary because common-law claims were
already available under state law. See Hearings on S.1944 before a
Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Commerce, 73d Cong., 2d Sess., 400
(1933) (statement of W.A. Hines); see _id.,_ at 403 (statement of J.A. Ladds)
("This act should not attempt to modify or restate the common law with respect
to personal injuries").

[8] In 1997, Congress pre-empted certain state requirements concerning over-
the-counter medications and cosmetics but expressly preserved product
liability actions. See 21 U.S.C. §§ 379r(e), 379s(d) ("Nothing in this section
shall be construed to modify or otherwise affect any action or the liability
of any person under the product liability law of any State").

[9] For similar examples, see 47 U.S.C. §§ 253(a), (d) (2000 ed.) (authorizing
the Federal Communications Commission to pre-empt "any [state] statute,
regulation, or legal requirement" that "may prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting the ability of any entity to provide any interstate or intrastate
telecommunications service"); 30 U.S.C. § 1254(g) (2006 ed.) (pre-empting any
statute that conflicts with "the purposes and the requirements of this
chapter" and permitting the Secretary of the Interior to "set forth any State
law or regulation which is preempted and superseded"); and 49 U.S.C. § 5125(d)
(2000 ed. and Supp. V) (authorizing the Secretary of Transportation to decide
whether a state or local statute that conflicts with the regulation of
hazardous waste transportation is pre-empted).

[10] See also 44 Fed.Reg. 37437 (1979) ("It is not the intent of the FDA to
influence the civil tort liability of the manufacturer"); 59 Fed. Reg. 3948
(1994) ("[P]roduct liability plays an important role in consumer protection");
Porter, The _Lohr_ Decision: FDA Perspective and Position, 52 Food & Drug L.J.
7, 10 (1997) (former chief counsel to the FDA stating that the FDA regarded
state law as complementing the agency's mission of consumer protection).

[11] In 1955, the same year that the agency approved Wyeth's Phenergan
application, an FDA advisory committee issued a report finding "conclusively"
that "the budget and staff of the Food and Drug Administration are inadequate
to permit the discharge of its existing responsibilities for the protection of
the American public." Citizens Advisory Committee on the FDA, Report to the
Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, H.R. Doc. No. 227, 84th Cong.,
1st Sess., 53. Three recent studies have reached similar conclusions. See FDA
Science Board, Report of the Subcommittee on Science and Technology: FDA
Science and Mission at Risk 2, 6 (2007), online at
http://www.fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/ac/07/briefing/ XXXX-
XXXXb_02_01_FDA%20Report%20on%20Science%20and%20 Technology.pdf (all Internet
materials as visited Feb. 23, 2009, and available in Clerk of Court's case
file) ("[T]he Agency suffers from serious scientific deficiencies and is not
positioned to meet current or emerging regulatory responsibilities"); National
Academies, Institute of Medicine, The Future of Drug Safety: Promoting and
Protecting the Health of the Public 193-194 (2007) ("The [FDA] lacks the
resources needed to accomplish its large and complex mission.... There is
widespread agreement that resources for postmarketing drug safety work are
especially inadequate and that resource limitations have hobbled the agency's
ability to improve and expand this essential component of its mission"); GAO,
Drug Safety: Improvement Needed in FDA's Postmarket Decision-making and
Oversight Process 5 (GAO-06-402, 2006), http://
www.gao.gov/new.items/d06402.pdf ("FDA lacks a clear and effective process for
making decisions about, and providing management oversight of, postmarket
safety issues"); see also House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Majority Staff Report, FDA Career Staff Objected to Agency Preemption Policies
4 (2008) ("[T]he Office of Chief Counsel ignored the warnings from FDA
scientists and career officials that the preemption language [of the 2006
preamble] was based on erroneous assertions about the ability of the drug
approval process to ensure accurate and up-to-date drug labels").

[12] See generally Brief for Former FDA Commissioners Drs. Donald Kennedy and
David Kessler as _Amici Curiae;_ see also Kessler & Vladeck, A Critical
Examination of the FDA's Efforts To Preempt Failure-To-Warn Claims, 96 Geo.
L.J. 461, 463 (2008); _Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC,_ 544 U.S. 431, 451, 125
S.Ct. 1788, 161 L.Ed.2d 687 (2005) (noting that state tort suits "can serve as
a catalyst" by aiding in the exposure of new dangers and prompting a
manufacturer or the federal agency to decide that a revised label is
required).

[13] The United States' _amicus_ brief is similarly undeserving of deference.
Unlike the Government's brief in _Geier v. American Honda Motor Co.,_ 529 U.S.
861, 120 S.Ct. 1913, 146 L.Ed.2d 914 (2000), which explained the effects of
state law on the DOT's regulation in a manner consistent with the agency's
prior accounts, see _id.,_ at 861, 120 S.Ct. 1913, the Government's
explanation of federal drug regulation departs markedly from the FDA's
understanding at all times relevant to this case.

[14] Wyeth's more specific contentionthat this case resembles _Geier_ because
the FDA determined that no additional warning on IV-push administration was
needed, thereby setting a ceiling on Phenergan's labelis belied by the
record. As we have discussed, the FDA did not consider and reject a stronger
warning against IV-push injection of Phenergan. See also App. 249-250 ("[A]
tort case is unlikely to obstruct the regulatory process when the record shows
that the FDA has paid very little attention to the issues raised by the
parties at trial").

[1] This structural limitation may be implicated in a pre-emption case if the
federal law at issue is beyond the scope of Congress' enumerated powers.
Expansion of congressional power through an "increasingly generous ...
interpretation of the commerce power of Congress," for example, creates "a
real risk that Congress will gradually erase the diffusion of power between
State and Nation on which the Framers based their faith in the efficiency and
vitality of our Republic." _Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit
Authority,_ 469 U.S. 528, 583-584, 105 S.Ct. 1005, 83 L.Ed.2d 1016 (1985)
(O'Connor, J., dissenting); see also _Marbury v. Madison,_ 1 Cranch 137, 176,
2 L.Ed. 60 (1803) ("The powers of the legislature are defined, and limited;
and that those limits may not be mistaken, or forgotten, the constitution is
written").

[2] The majority's pre-emption analysis relies in part on a presumption
against pre-emption. _Ante,_ at 1194, and n. 3 (opinion of STEVENS, J.).
Because it is evident from the text of the relevant federal statutes and
regulations themselves that the state-law judgment below is not pre-empted, it
is not necessary to decide whether, or to what extent, the presumption should
apply in a case such as this one, where Congress has not enacted an express-
pre-emption clause. Cf. _Altria Group, Inc. v. Good,_ 555 U.S. ___, ___, 129
S.Ct. 538, 551-552, ___ L.Ed.2d ___ (2008) (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (rejecting
the use of a presumption against pre-emption in express pre-emption cases).

[3] According to the Court, the Pennsylvania Act required:

"every alien 18 years or over, with certain exceptions, to register once each
year; provide such information as is required by the statute, plus any `other
information and details' that the Department of Labor and Industry may direct;
pay $1 as an annual registration fee; receive an alien identification card and
carry it at all times; show the card whenever it may be demanded by any police
officer or any agent of the Department of Labor and Industry; and exhibit the
card as a condition precedent to registering a motor vehicle in his name or
obtaining a license to operate one.... Nonexempt aliens who fail to register
are subject to a fine ... or imprisonment .... For failure to carry an
identification card or for failure to show it upon proper demand, the
punishment is a fine ... or imprisonment...." _Hines,_ 312 U.S., at 59-60, 61
S.Ct. 399 (footnote omitted).

The Court explained that the federal Alien Registration Act required:

"a single registration of aliens 14 years of age and over; detailed
information specified by the Act, plus `such additional matters as may be
prescribed by the Commissioner, with the approval of the Attorney General';
finger-printing of all registrants; and secrecy of the federal files.... No
requirement that aliens carry a registration card to be exhibited to police or
others is embodied in the law, and only the wilful failure to register is made
a criminal offense...." _Id.,_ at 60-61, 61 S.Ct. 399.

[4] According to Justice Stone, the _Hines_ majority's analysis resembled an
inquiry into whether the federal act "`occupied the field,'" rather than an
application of simple conflict pre-emption principles. _Id.,_ at 78, 61 S.Ct.
399 (dissenting opinion). Regardless of whether _Hines_ involved field or
conflict pre-emption, the dissent accurately observed that in assessing the
boundaries of the federal law _i.e.,_ the scope of its pre-emptive effect
the Court should look to the federal statute itself, rather than speculate
about Congress' unstated intentions. _Id.,_ at 78-79, 61 S.Ct. 399. See also
_Camps Newfound/Owatonna, Inc. v. Town of Harrison,_ 520 U.S. 564, 616-617,
117 S.Ct. 1590, 137 L.Ed.2d 852 (1997) (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (noting that
"field pre-emption is itself suspect, at least as applied in the absence of a
congressional command that a particular field be pre-empted").

[5] The Safety Act's express pre-emption provision stated in part:

"Whenever a Federal motor vehicle safety standard established under this
subchapter is in effect, no State ... shall have any authority either to
establish, or to continue in effect, with respect to any motor vehicle or item
of motor vehicle equipment[,] any safety standard applicable to the same
aspect of performance of such vehicle or item of equipment which is not
identical to the Federal standard." 15 U.S.C. § 1392(d) (1988 ed.).

The Safety Act also included a saving clause, which stated: "Compliance with
any Federal motor vehicle safety standard issued under this subchapter does
not exempt any person from any liability under common law." § 1397(k). The
majority and dissent in _Geier_ agreed that the import of the express pre-
emption provision and the saving clause, read together, was that by its terms,
the Safety Act did not expressly pre-empt state common-law actions. See
_Geier,_ 529 U.S., at 867-868, 120 S.Ct. 1913; _id.,_ at 895-898, 120 S.Ct.
1913 (STEVENS, J., dissenting).

[6] In addition to the impropriety of looking beyond the plain text of the
saving clause to regulatory history, DOT comments, and an administrative
litigating position to evaluate the Safety Act's pre-emptive effect, it is
unclear that the Court in _Geier_ accurately assessed the federal objectives
of the relevant federal law. As the dissent in _Geier_ pointed out, the
purpose of the Safety Act, as stated by Congress, was generally "`to reduce
traffic accidents and deaths and injuries to persons resulting from traffic
accidents.'" _Id.,_ at 888-889, 120 S.Ct. 1913 (opinion of STEVENS, J.)
(quoting 15 U.S.C. § 1381 (1988 ed.)). On its face, that goal is of course
consistent with a state-law judgment that a particular vehicle needed a
passive restraint system that would better protect persons from death and
injury during traffic accidents. Furthermore, the dissent observed that "by
definition all of the standards established under the Safety Act ... impose
minimum, rather than fixed or maximum, requirements." 529 U.S., at 903, 120
S.Ct. 1913 (citing 15 U.S.C. § 1391(2) (1988 ed.)). Thus, in the dissent's
view, the requirements of the DOT regulation were not ceilings, and it was
"obvious that the Secretary favored a more rapid increase" than required by
the regulations. 529 U.S., at 903, 120 S.Ct. 1913. That goal also would be
consistent with a state-law judgment finding that a manufacturer acted
negligently when it failed to include an airbag in a particular car. See
_id.,_ at 903-904, 120 S.Ct. 1913.

[1] Indeed, respondent conceded below that Wyeth _did_ propose an adequate
warning of Phenergan's risks. See Plaintiff Diana Levine's Memorandum in
Opposition to Wyeth's Motion for Summary Judgment in _Levine v. American Home
Products Corp._ (now Wyeth), No. 670-12-01 Wncv (Super. Ct. Washington Cty.,
Vt.), ¶ 7, p. 26. Specifically, respondent noted: "In 1988, Wyeth proposed
language that would have prevented this accident by requiring a running IV and
explaining why a running IV will address and reduce the risk [of intra-
arterial injection]." _Ibid._ See also _id.,_ at 24 ("Although not strong
enough, this improved the labeling instruction, if followed, would have
prevented the inadvertent administration of Phenergan into an artery ...").
The FDA rejected Wyeth's proposal. See App. 359.

[2] Moreover, in the trial judge's final charge, he told the jury that "the
critical factual issue which you must decide" is whether Phenergan's FDA-
mandated label reflects a proper balance between "the risks and benefits of
intravenous administration and the potential for injury to patients." _Id.,_
at 220. See also ___ Vt. ___, ___, 944 A.2d 179, 182 (2006) (recognizing that
respondent's argument is that Phenergan's "label should not have allowed IV
push as a means of administration").

[3] Respondent sued her physician, physician's assistant, and hospital for
malpractice. After the parties settled that suit for an undisclosed sum,
respondent's physician sent her a letter in which he admitted "responsibility"
for her injury and expressed his "profoun[d] regre[t]" and "remors[e]" for his
actions. 1 Tr. 178-179 (Mar. 8, 2004) (testimony of Dr. John Matthew); see
also App. 102-103 (testimony of physician's assistant Jessica Fisch) (noting
that her "sense of grief" was so "great" that she "would have gladly cut off
[her own] arm" and given it to respondent). Thereafter, both the physician and
the physician's assistant agreed to testify on respondent's behalf in her suit
against Wyeth.

[4] To be sure, Congress recognized the principles of conflict pre-emption in
the FDCA. See Drug Amendments of 1962, § 202, 76 Stat. 793 ("Nothing in the
amendments made by this Act to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act shall
be construed as invalidating any provision of State law ... unless there is a
direct and positive conflict between such amendments and such provision of
State law"). But a provision that simply recognizes the background principles
of conflict pre-emption is not a traditional "saving clause," and even if it
were, it would not displace our conflict-pre-emption analysis. See _Geier v.
American Honda Motor Co.,_ 529 U.S. 861, 869, 120 S.Ct. 1913, 146 L.Ed.2d 914
(2000) ("[T]he saving clause ... does _not_ bar the ordinary working of
conflict pre-emption principles"); _id.,_ at 873-874, 120 S.Ct. 1913 ("The
Court has ... refused to read general `saving' provisions to tolerate actual
conflict both in cases involving impossibility _and_ in `frustration-of-
purpose' cases" (emphasis deleted and citation omitted)).

[5] The FDA cited numerous articles that generally discuss the costs and
benefits associated with IV push. See, _e.g.,_ Nahrwold & Phelps, Inadvertent
Intra-Arterial Injection of Mephenteramine, 70 Rocky Mountain Medical J. 38
(Sept.1973) (cited in App. 314, no. 14); Albo, Cheung, Ruth, Snyder, &
Beemtsma, Effect of Intra-Arterial Injections of Barbituates, 120 Am. J. of
Surgery 676 (1970) (cited in App. 314, no. 12); Corser, Masey, Jacob, Kernoff,
& Browne, Ischaemia Following Self-administered Intra-arterial Injection of
Methylphenidate and Diamorphine, 40 Anesthesiology 51 (1985) (cited in App.
314, no. 9); Correspondence Regarding Thiopental and Thiamylal (3 letters), 59
Anesthesiology 153 (1983) (cited in App. 314, no. 11); Miller, Arthur, &
Stratigos, Intra-arterial Injection of a Barbituate, 23 Anesthesia Progress 25
(1976) (cited in App. 315, no. 19).

[6] See Webb & Lampert, Accidental Arterial Injections, 101 Am. J. Obstetrics
& Gynecology 365 (1968) (cited in App. 313, no. 5).

[7] See Hager & Wilson, Gangrene of the Hand Following Intra-arterial
Injection, 94 Archives of Surgery 86 (1967) (cited in App. 313, no. 7); Enloe,
Sylvester, & Morris, Hazards of Intra-Arterial Injection of Hydroxyzine, 16
Canadian Anaesthetists' Society J. 425 (1969) (hereinafter Enloe) (noting
"recent reports" of "the occurrence of severe necrosis and gangrene following
[administration of] promethazine (Phenergan & reg;)" (cited in App. 314, no.
15)). See also Mostafavi & Samimi, Accidental Intra-arterial Injection of
Promethazine HCl During General Anesthesia, 35 Anesthesiology 645 (1971)
(reporting a case of gangrene, which required partial amputation of three
fingers, after Phenergan was inadvertently pushed into an artery in the
"antecubital" area); Promethazine, p. 7, in Clinical Pharmacology (Gold
Standard Multimedia Inc. CD-ROM, version 1.16 (1998) (noting that
"[i]nadvertent intra-arterial injection [of Phenergan] can result in
arteriospasm ... and development of gangrene")).

[8] Hager and Wilson noted that the most common reactions to intra-arterial
injections of drugs like Phenergan include "[i]mmediate, severe, burning
pain," as well as "blanching." 94 Archives of Surgery, at 87-88. The FDA
required Wyeth to include Hager and Wilson's observations on Phenergan's
label. See App. 311 (requiring the label to warn that "`[t]he first sign [of
an intra-arterial injection] may be the patient's reaction to a sensation of
fiery burning'" pain and "`[b]lanching'").

[9] See Enloe 427 (discussing hydroxyzinean antihistamine with chemical
properties similar to those of Phenerganand suggesting its "temporary"
benefits can never outweigh the risks of intra-arterial injection); see also
Goldsmith & Trieger, Accidental Intra-Arterial Injection: A Medical Emergency,
22 Anesthesia Progress 180 (1975) (noting the risks of intra-arterial
administration of hydroxyzine) (cited in App. 315, no. 18); Klatte, Brooks, &
Rhamy, Toxicity of Intra-Arterial Barbituates and Tranquilizing Drugs, 92
Radiology 700 (1969) (same) (cited in App. 314, no. 13). With full knowledge
of those risks, FDA retained IV push for Phenergan, although the agency
required Wyeth to incorporate observations from the Enloe article into
Phenergan's label. Compare Enloe 427 (arguing that "every precaution should be
taken to avoid inadvertent intra-arterial injection," including the use of "an
obviously well-functioning venoclysis"), with App. 312 (FDA's 1987 changes to
Phenergan's label). In contrast, at some time around 1970, the FDA prohibited
all intravenous use of hydroxyzine. See _id.,_ at 79 (testimony of Dr. Harold
Green). The FDA's decision to regulate the two drugs
differentlynotwithstanding (1) the agency's knowledge of the risks associated
with both drugs and (2) the agency's recognition of the relevance of
hydroxyzine-related articles and case reports in its regulation of
Phenerganfurther demonstrates that the FDA intentionally preserved IV-push
administration for Phenergan. See also Haas, Correspondence, 33 Anesthesia
Progress 281 (1986) ("[Hydroxyzine's] restriction does not lie with the
medicine itself, but in the practice and malpractice of intravenous
techniques. Unfortunately, the practitioner who knows how to treat injection
technique problems is usually not the practitioner with the intravenous
technique problems").

[10] See also Engler, Freeman, Kanavage, Ogden, & Moretz, Production of
Gangrenous Extremities by Intra-Arterial Injections, 30 Am. Surgeon 602 (1964)
("Accidental arterial injection most often occurs in the antecubital region
because this is a favorite site for venopuncture and in this area the ulnar
and brachial arteries are superficial and easily entered" (cited in App. 313,
no. 6)); Engler, Gangrenous Extremities Resulting from Intra-arterial
Injections, 94 Archives of Surgery 644 (1966) (similar) (cited in App. 314,
no. 16); Lynas & Bisset, Intra-arterial Thiopentone, 24 Anaesthesia 257 (1969)
("Most [anesthesiologists] agree that injections on the medial aspect of the
antecubital fossa are best avoided" (cited in App. 314, no. 8)); Waters,
Intra-arterial Thiopentone, 21 Anesthesia 346 (1966) ("The risk of producing
gangrene of the forearm by accidental injection of sodium thiopentone into an
artery at the elbow has been recognised for many years" (cited in App. 314,
no. 10)); see also Hager & Wilson, 94 Archives of Surgery, at 88 (emphasizing
that one of the best ways to prevent inadvertent intra-arterial injections is
to be aware of "aberrant or superficial arteries at the antecubital, forearm,
wrist, and hand level"); Mostafavi & Samimi, _supra_ (warning against
antecubital injections).

[11] See App. 311 (requiring Phenergan's label to warn that practitioners
should "`[b]eware of the close proximity of arteries and veins at commonly
used injection sites and consider the possibility of aberrant arteries'").

[12] "Aspiration" refers to drawing a small amount of blood back into the
needle to determine whether the needle is in an artery or a vein. Ordinarily,
arterial blood is brighter than venous bloodbut contact with Phenergan causes
discoloration, which makes aspiration an unreliable method of protecting
against intra-arterial injection. See _id.,_ at 282. Therefore, the label
warned that when using IV push, a medical professional should beware that
"[a]spiration of dark blood does not preclude intra-arterial needle placement,
because blood is discolored upon contact with Phenergan Injection." _Id.,_ at
390.

[13] In addition, respondent's own medical expert testified at trial that it
is a principle of "basic anatomy" that the antecubital fossa contains aberrant
arteries. See 2 Tr. 34-35 (Mar. 9, 2004) (testimony of Dr. Daniel O'Brien);
see also _ibid._ (noting that Gray's Anatomy, which is "the Bible of anatomy,"
also warns of arteries in the antecubital space).

[14] Thus, it is not true that "this Court has long" applied a presumption
against pre-emption in conflict pre-emption cases. _Ante,_ at 1195, n. 3
(majority opinion). As long ago as _Gibbons v. Ogden,_ 9 Wheat. 1, 210, 6
L.Ed. 23 (1824), the Court inquired whether a state law "interfer[ed] with,"
was "contrary to," or "c[a]me into collision with" federal lawand it did so
without ever invoking a "presumption." See also Davis, Unmasking the
Presumption in Favor of Preemption, 53 S.C.L.Rev. 967, 974 (2002) (noting that
many of the Court's early pre-emption cases "resulted in almost automatic
preemption of concurrent state regulation"). In subsequent years the Court has
sometimes acknowledged a limited "presumption against pre-emption," but it
nonetheless remained an open questionbefore todaywhether that presumption
applied in conflict pre-emption cases. See _Crosby v. National Foreign Trade
Council,_ 530 U.S. 363, 374, n. 8, 120 S.Ct. 2288, 147 L.Ed.2d 352 (2000) ("We
leave for another day a consideration in this context of a presumption against
preemption"). Moreover, this Court has never held that the "presumption"
applies in an areasuch as drug labelingthat has long been "reserved for
federal regulation." _United States v. Locke,_ 529 U.S. 89, 111, 120 S.Ct.
1135, 146 L.Ed.2d 69 (2000). See also _Buckman Co. v. Plaintiffs' Legal
Comm.,_ 531 U.S. 341, 347-348, 121 S.Ct. 1012, 148 L.Ed.2d 854 (2001).

[15] Vesicants may cause "blistering, severe tissue injury, or tissue
necrosis" upon extravasationeven if the drug is not injected into an artery.
See, _e.g.,_ Schulmeister, Administering Vesicants, 9 Clinical J. of Oncology
Nursing 469, 469-470 (2005). See also _ante,_ at 1192 (majority opinion)
(noting that Phenergan is labeled as an "irritant"); cf. Brief for Anju
Budhwani et al. as _Amici Curiae_ 15 (suggesting Phenergan should be
considered a "vesicant").

[16] FDA, Oncology Tools Product Label Details, online at
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/ scripts/cder/onctools/labels.cfm?GN=
meclorethamine,% 20nitrogen% 20mustard (as visited Mar. 2, 2009, and available
in Clerk of Court's case file).

[17] _Ibid._

[18] The same is true of FDA's regulation of hydroxyzine. See n. 9, _supra._

[1] Wilkes & Barton-Burke, 2008 Oncology Nursing Drug Handbook 27-33 (2008)
(Table 1.6).

[2] IV-push information is derived from the "dosage and administration"
sections of individual drug labels (available in Clerk of Court's case file).

