### Note on Animus and Rational basis with "bite"

Romer is often described as a case of "rational basis with bite," or a more strict than ordinary use of the rational basis standard, associated with a judicial belief that the government acted with "animus" toward the challenger.  

Rational basis with bite doesn't exist, at least not officially. Some scholars, and occasionally a lower court, will use the "rational basis with bite" label to suggest that the court nominally applies rational basis to state action taken against certain disadvantaged groups---the disabled, gays and lesbians---but really applies something stricter. But the Supreme Court has never said "we now apply rational basis with bite," or otherwise admitted its existence or held that there's any special kind of enhanced rational basis.

A key example of a case often described as "rational basis with bite" is *Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center*, 473 U.S. 432 (1985). The city of Cleburne imposed special zoning requirements on a group home for citizens with cognitive disabilities and denied them a permit. The Supreme Court rejected the court of appeals's attempt to treat mental disability as a quasi-suspect classification, but nonetheless struck down the permit denial in question. The decision primarily focused on the fact that the city's asserted justifications for the law all depended on fears and stereotypes about the mentally disabled: that nearby property owners wouldn't want to be around them, that nearby junior high school students might harass them. 

What's striking to some commentators about Cleburne is that the court was not very deferential to the city's reasoning process at all: it disregarded the city's notion that housing the mentally disabled would be different from other kinds of group housing that were (allegedly) not subject to these special needs, such as housing for the elderly. We might agree with this ruling; it seems to coincide with common sense---but ordinarily, in rational basis review, the courts are expected to defer to such legislative judgments rather than set them aside on such common-sensical grounds.  

However, we might disagree with the "rational basis with bite" reading of Cleburne. Another way to read it, one which might be better supported by the text of the opinion, is that the city's decision was just arbitrary: there were no remotely plausible reasons to distinguish housing for the mentally disabled from housing for other citizens needing special assistance, except an explicit appeal to community hostility; Cleburne could stand for the proposition not that the Court will discover "animus" where it disagrees with a legislature's reasoning, but that the absence of any reason for the law other than an explicit appeal to community animus will not support rational basis.  Thus, consider the following paragraphs from Cleburne (which unfortunately includes archaic ableist language): 

> The constitutional issue is clearly posed. The city does not require a special use permit in an R-3 zone for apartment houses, multiple dwellings, boarding and lodging houses, fraternity or sorority houses, dormitories, apartment hotels, hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes for convalescents or the aged (other than for the insane or feebleminded or alcoholics or drug addicts), private clubs or fraternal orders, and other specified uses. It does, however, insist on a special permit for the Featherston home, and it does so, as the District Court found, because it would be a facility for the mentally retarded. May the city require the permit for this facility when other care and multiple-dwelling facilities are freely permitted?

> It is true, as already pointed out, that the mentally retarded as a group are indeed different from others not sharing their misfortune, and in this respect they may be different from those who would occupy other facilities that would be permitted in an R-3 zone without a special permit. But this difference is largely irrelevant unless the Featherston home and those who would occupy it would threaten legitimate interests of the city in a way that other permitted uses such as boarding houses and hospitals would not. Because in our view the record does not reveal any rational basis for believing that the Featherston home would pose any special threat to the city's legitimate interests, we affirm the judgment below insofar as it holds the ordinance invalid as applied in this case.

> The District Court found that the City Council's insistence on the permit rested on several factors. First, the Council was concerned with the negative attitude of the majority of property owners located within 200 feet of the Featherston facility, as well as with the fears of elderly residents of the neighborhood. But mere negative attitudes, or fear, unsubstantiated by factors which are properly cognizable in a zoning proceeding, are not permissible bases for treating a home for the mentally retarded differently from apartment houses, multiple dwellings, and the like. It is plain that the electorate as a whole, whether by referendum or otherwise, could not order city action violative of the Equal Protection Clause, and the city may not avoid the strictures of that Clause by deferring to the wishes or objections of some fraction of the body politic. "Private biases may be outside the reach of the law, but the law cannot, directly or indirectly, give them effect." 

> Second, the Council had two objections to the location of the facility. It was concerned that the facility was across the street from a junior high school, and it feared that the students might harass the occupants of the Featherston home. But the school itself is attended by about 30 mentally retarded students, and denying a permit based on such vague, undifferentiated fears is again permitting some portion of the community to validate what would otherwise be an equal protection violation. The other objection to the home's location was that it was located on "a five hundred year flood plain." This concern with the possibility of a flood, however, can hardly be based on a distinction between the Featherston home and, for example, nursing homes, homes for convalescents or the aged, or sanitariums or hospitals, any of which could be located on the Featherston site without obtaining a special use permit. The same may be said of another concern of the Council - doubts about the legal responsibility for actions which the mentally retarded might take. If there is no concern about legal responsibility with respect to other uses that would be permitted in the area, such as boarding and fraternity houses, it is difficult to believe that the groups of mildly or moderately mentally retarded individuals who would live at 201 Featherston would present any different or special hazard.

> Fourth, the Council was concerned with the size of the home and the number of people that would occupy it. The District Court found, and the Court of Appeals repeated, that "[i]f the potential residents of the Featherston Street home were not mentally retarded, but the home was the same in all other respects, its use would be permitted under the city's zoning ordinance."  Given this finding, there would be no restrictions on the number of people who could occupy this home as a boarding house, nursing home, family dwelling, fraternity house, or dormitory. The question is whether it is rational to treat the mentally retarded differently. It is true that they suffer disability not shared by others; but why this difference warrants a density regulation that others need not observe is not at all apparent. At least this record does not clarify how, in this connection, the characteristics of the intended occupants of the Featherston home rationally justify denying to those occupants what would be permitted to groups occupying the same site for different purposes. Those who would live in the Featherston home are the type of individuals who, with supporting staff, satisfy federal and state standards for group housing in the community; and there is no dispute that the home would meet the federal square-footage-per-resident requirement for facilities of this type. In the words of the Court of Appeals, "[t]he City never justifies its apparent view that other people can live under such `crowded' conditions when mentally retarded persons cannot."

> In the courts below the city also urged that the ordinance is aimed at avoiding concentration of population and at lessening congestion of the streets. These concerns obviously fail to explain why apartment houses, fraternity and sorority houses, hospitals and the like, may freely locate in the area without a permit. So, too, the expressed worry about fire hazards, the serenity of the neighborhood, and the avoidance of danger to other residents fail rationally to justify singling out a home such as 201 Featherston for the special use permit, yet imposing no such restrictions on the many other uses freely permitted in the neighborhood.

> The short of it is that requiring the permit in this case appears to us to rest on an irrational prejudice against the mentally retarded, including those who would occupy the Featherston facility and who would live under the closely supervised and highly regulated conditions expressly provided for by state and federal law.

Another case that arguably is an example of "rational basis with bite" is *Plyler v. Doe*, 457 U.S. 202 (1981), which struck down a Texas law denying an education to undocumented immigrant children. Here's part of what Justice Brennan said for the court there:

> Appellants argue that the classification at issue furthers an interest in the "preservation of the state's limited resources for the education of its lawful residents. Of course, a concern for the preservation of resources, standing alone, can hardly justify the classification used in allocating those resources. The State must do more than justify its classification with a concise expression of an intention to discriminate. Apart from the asserted state prerogative to act against undocumented children solely on the basis of their undocumented status -- an asserted prerogative that carries only minimal force in the circumstances of these cases -- we discern three colorable state interests that might support [the law].

> First, appellants appear to suggest that the State may seek to protect itself from an influx of illegal immigrants. While a State might have an interest in mitigating the potentially harsh economic effects of sudden shifts in population, [the law] hardly offers an effective method of dealing with an urgent demographic or economic problem. There is no evidence in the record suggesting that illegal entrants impose any significant burden on the State's economy. To the contrary, the available evidence suggests that illegal aliens underutilize public services, while contributing their labor to the local economy and tax money to the state fisc.

> Second, appellants suggest that undocumented children are appropriately singled out for exclusion because of the special burdens they impose on the State's ability to provide high-quality public education. But the record in no way supports the claim that exclusion of undocumented children is likely to improve the overall quality of education in the State. As the District Court noted, the State failed to offer any credible supporting evidence that a proportionately small diminution of the funds spent on each child which might result from devoting some state funds to the education of the excluded group will have a grave impact on the quality of education. Of course, even if improvement in the quality of education were a likely result of barring some number of children from the schools of the State, the State must support its selection of this group as the appropriate target for exclusion.

> Finally, appellants suggest that undocumented children are appropriately singled out because their unlawful presence within the United States renders them less likely than other children to remain within the boundaries of the State, and to put their education to productive social or political use within the State. Even assuming that such an interest is legitimate, it is an interest that is most difficult to quantify. The State has no assurance that any child, citizen or not, will employ the education provided by the State within the confines of the State's borders.

Again, this decision seems right as a matter of morality and policy, but it doesn't look like the rational basis review Justice Brennan claimed it was. Notice, in particular, how the Court demands the state prove that its cost-saving measure will improve education. But wait a minute, wasn't the burden in rational basis supposed to be on the challenger? Brennan also appealed to a "substantial state interest" rather than the usual "legitimate state interest."

We might read Plyler to be about the heightened scrutiny afforded to state distinctions on the basis of alienage, but this doesn't quite fit, partly because the law was about undocumented immigrants in particular (and didn't discriminate against immigrants with papers), and partly because the Court explicitly said that it was applying rational basis.^[On alienage more broadly: the constitutional treatment of that classification is somewhat complex. The basic black-letter rule is that alienage is a suspect classification, but the federal government has more leeway than the states, and there are some cases accepting such classifications in, e.g., sensitive kinds of state employment. Doug Linder, a professor at UMKC, has a good overview of the major cases at [http://law2.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/conlaw/alienage.html](http://law2.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/conlaw/alienage.html).]

We should also note that in Plyler, the Court appeared to enhance its usual rational basis scrutiny in part because of the degree of harm imposed and the fact that those harmed were children: 

> Undocumented aliens cannot be treated as a suspect class, because their presence in this country in violation of federal law is not a "constitutional irrelevancy." Nor is education a fundamental right; a State need not justify by compelling necessity every variation in the manner in which education is provided to its population. But more is involved in these cases than the abstract question whether ยง 21.031 discriminates against a suspect class, or whether education is a fundamental right. Section 21.031 imposes a lifetime hardship on a discrete class of children not accountable for their disabling status. The stigma of illiteracy will mark them for the rest of their lives. By denying these children a basic education, we deny them the ability to live within the structure of our civic institutions, and foreclose any realistic possibility that they will contribute in even the smallest way to the progress of our Nation. In determining the rationality of ยง 21.031, we may appropriately take into account its costs to the Nation and to the innocent children who are its victims. In light of these countervailing costs, the discrimination contained in ยง 21.031 can hardly be considered rational unless it furthers some substantial goal of the State.

Another example, along similar lines, is *USDA v. Moreno*, 413 U.S. 528 (1973). There, the court, again via Justice Brennan, struck down limitation of food stamp assistance to related, not unrelated, people living together. The government had claimed that it was justifiable because Congress could have thought unrelated households are more likely to be committing welfare fraud. The court barely discussed that justification, essentially dismissing it out of hand.

> Regrettably, there is little legislative history to illuminate the purposes of the 1971 amendment of 3(e). The legislative history that does exist, however, indicates that that amendment was intended to prevent so-called "hippies" and "hippie communes" from participating in the food stamp program. The challenged classification clearly cannot be sustained by reference to this congressional purpose. For if the constitutional conception of "equal protection of the laws" means anything, it must at the very least mean that a bare congressional desire to harm a politically unpopular group cannot constitute a legitimate governmental interest. As a result, a purpose to discriminate against hippies cannot, in and of itself and without reference to some independent considerations in the public interest, justify the 1971 amendment.

> Although apparently conceding this point, the Government maintains that the challenged classification should nevertheless be upheld as rationally related to the clearly legitimate governmental interest in minimizing fraud in the administration of the food stamp program. In essence, the Government contends that, in adopting the 1971 amendment, Congress might rationally have thought (1) that households with one or more unrelated members are more likely than "fully related" households to contain individuals who abuse the program by fraudulently failing to report sources of income or by voluntarily remaining poor; and (2) that such households are "relatively unstable," thereby increasing the difficulty of detecting such abuses. But even if we were to accept as rational the Government's wholly unsubstantiated assumptions concerning the differences between "related" and "unrelated" households, we still could not agree with the Government's conclusion that the denial of essential federal food assistance to all otherwise eligible households containing unrelated members constitutes a rational effort to deal with these concerns.

> At the outset, it is important to note that the Food Stamp Act itself contains provisions, wholly independent of 3(e), aimed specifically at the problems of fraud and of the voluntarily poor. For example, with certain exceptions, 5(c) of the Act renders ineligible for assistance any household containing "an able-bodied adult person between the ages of eighteen and sixty-five" who fails to register for, and accept, offered employment. Similarly, 14(b) and (c) specifically impose strict criminal penalties upon any individual who obtains or uses food stamps fraudulently. The existence of these provisions necessarily casts considerable doubt upon the proposition that the 1971 amendment could rationally have been intended to prevent those very same abuses. 

> Moreover, in practical effect, the challenged classification simply does not operate so as rationally to further the prevention of fraud. As previously noted, 3(e) defines an eligible "household" as "a group of related individuals 1. living as one economic unit; 2. sharing common cooking facilities; and 3. for whom food is customarily purchased in common." Thus, two unrelated persons living together and meeting all three of these conditions would constitute a single household ineligible for assistance. If financially feasible, however, these same two individuals can legally avoid the "unrelated person" exclusion simply by altering their living arrangements so as to eliminate any one of the three conditions. By so doing, they effectively create two separate "households," both of which are eligible for assistance. Indeed, as the California Director of Social Welfare has explained: "The `related household' limitations will eliminate many households from eligibility in the Food Stamp Program. It is my understanding that the Congressional intent of the new regulations are specifically aimed at the `hippies' and `hippie communes.' Most people in this category can and will alter their living arrangements in order to remain eligible for food stamps. However, the AFDC mothers who try to raise their standard of living by sharing housing will be affected. They will not be able to utilize the altered living patterns in order to continue to be eligible without giving up their advantage of shared housing costs."

> Thus, in practical operation, the 1971 amendment excludes from participation in the food stamp program, not those persons who are "likely to abuse the program" but, rather, only those persons who are so desperately in need of aid that they cannot even afford to alter their living arrangements so as to retain their eligibility. Traditional equal protection analysis does not require that every classification be drawn with precise "mathematical nicety." But the classification here in issue is not only "imprecise," it is wholly without any rational basis.

Is this actually rational basis?  Could Congress have rationally believed, for example, that anti-fraud protections are hard to enforce directly but that there's a correlation between fraud and unrelated people living together such that it could indirectly prevent fraud by imposing extra burdens on unrelated people living together who sought welfare assistance?  (That might be bloody-minded and cruel policy, but is it *irrational* with respect to fraud prevention?)

And then, of course, there are the gay rights cases. So what do we make of this? On balance, it's probably fair to say that if it looks like the state is picking on some group; where it looks like that group is disadvantaged and it looks like the decision is rooted in stereotypes and prejudice---children of undocumented immigrants, food stamp recipients, the disabled, gays and lesbians---even though that group isn't picked out by some suspect or semi-suspect classification; and particularly where the state is imposing really severe burdens on such a group; there's some chance that instead of choosing to create a new semi-suspect classification, the court will just quietly apply a rougher rational basis standard than usual.

Reminder: setting aside rational basis with bite cases, a much more forgiving kind of rational basis is the default rule, and people who are trying to win greater protection for some group or another often show and ask the Court to hold that a given classification ought to be added to the list of suspect or semi-suspect classifications. And they typically lose: they lost with disability, with socioeconomic class, and, to this day, the Court still hasn't held that sexual orientation is a semi-suspect class.

**Reminder table of classifications and levels of scrutiny**

| Level of Scrutiny     | Importance of government interest | Relationship          | Core Classification |
|-----------------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+---------------------|
| Strict Scrutiny       | Compelling Interest               | Narrowly Tailored     | Race (suspect)      |
| Intermediate Scrutiny | Important Interest                | Substantially Related | Sex (semi-suspect)  |
| Rational Basis        | Legitimate Interest               | Rationally Related    | Catch-all           |


