Procedural Due Process: The Missing Casebook Chapter

Paul Gowder

The University of Iowa

Version 1.1, released December 1, 2013

**Copyright and access notice**

Copyright 2013, Paul Gowder. This document may be freely reproduced by
instructors and students for educational purposes, and may be freely
compiled into collections of material for distribution to students. The
foregoing permission is given on three conditions: 1) credit is given to
the author, 2) this copyright and access notice is included, and 3)
students are not charged, except for the actual cost of printing paper
copies, to access this document or any part thereof, and, if students
are charged printing costs, they are first informed that a free copy is
available online. This document will always be available online via
[[paul-gowder.com]{.underline}](http://paul-gowder.com).

To instructors: if you use this in your courses, I would appreciate (but
do not demand) a note at
[[paul-gowder\@uiowa.edu]{.underline}](mailto:paul-gowder@uiowa.edu).

Introduction for Instructors
----------------------------

In searching for a text for a second-year Constitutional Law II course,
I found that almost all casebooks, including some otherwise quite
excellent choices, paid very little attention to procedural due process.
Ordinarily, the topic is consigned to a very short section tacked onto
the end of a much more substantial discussion of substantive due
process, *Lochner*, etc.

This neglect misses the practical, theoretical, doctrinal, and
pedagogical importance of procedural due process. *Practically*, my
experience in both civil rights litigation and low-income legal services
has led me to believe that the procedural due process claim is an
important tool for litigants, particularly litigants who are not members
of the dominant socioeconomic groups in the American political
community, to have their legitimate interests vindicated by the legal
system. *Theoretically*, procedural due process is an element of the
normative ideal of the rule of law, and, accordingly, is an important
guardian of important moral interests in a political community.[^1]
*Doctrinally*, procedural due process is important particularly for the
light it sheds on the separation between legislative and judicial power,
as well as on equal protection, through the Londoner/Bi-Metallic
distinction between general law and the application of law to particular
people. *Pedagogically*, procedural due process provides an important
link between the classic second-year individual-rights focused
constitutional law II course and several first year courses, including
civil procedure, criminal law/procedure, and (via the separation of
powers role of procedural due process), constitutional law I. It also
can help provide a grounding for other upper-level courses, particularly
federal courts and administrative law.

In an attempt to remedy this situation, I am making this supplementary
material free of charge to all comers, not only for my own students, but
for other faculty as well. For the latter, I encourage you to make use
of it in your own courses, or even modify or distribute it, if you would
like, in other materials. I only ask that you provide appropriate
attribution and drop me an e-mail to let me know how it's been useful to
you. I would also greatly appreciate any feedback.

This is an experimental document. At the moment, it consists of very
lightly edited cases, and very few notes; it is meant to be suitable for
use in any course covering procedural due process, regardless of the
casebook or official title of the course (e.g., constitutional law,
public benefits law, constitutional criminal procedure, civil
procedure).[^2] Because I intend the supplement to be useful in a wide
variety of courses and with numerous casebooks, I have erred on the side
of length; this supplement is not intended to be assigned in its
entirety. Future versions---if I create any---may operate from different
premises.

**Introduction for Students**

The Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, applying
to the federal and state governments, respectively, forbid the
government in nearly identical language from "depriv\[ing\]...any
person... of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law."
The doctrine of procedural due process takes the fairly literal
interpretation of this text and applies it, requiring states and the
federal government to provide legal process (typically some variant of
notice and an opportunity to be heard) before depriving them of, life,
liberty, or property.

The two key questions in procedural due process analysis are thus,
unsurprisingly, 1) is the government depriving someone of life, liberty,
or property?; and 2) how much process is due? The answers to the first
question are sometimes easy, e.g., if the government is putting someone
in prison or taking his or her land. Sometimes, however, they are quite
difficult---is terminating income assistance benefits a deprivation of
property?

The second question is also often difficult, because there is a broad
menu of potential process that citizens may be given. They may, for
example, be given a hearing *before* or *after* the deprivation is
carried out. They may be given a hearing *in person* or *by written
submission*. They may not be allowed to have *counsel*, may be allowed
to have counsel at their own expense, or may be provided counsel at
government expense. They may be allowed to *cross-examine* witnesses or
not. Many other options are available, only some of which will be
acceptable in any given case. The Supreme Court has established a test,
in *Matthews v. Eldridge* (given below), which balances 1) the
importance of the private interest, 2) the risk of erroneous
deprivation, and 3) the importance of the government interest.

As with all balancing tests, the *Matthews* test often gives quite
inadequate guidance. Pay attention to this problem: you will see it in
many other doctrinal areas in constitutional law (e.g. the *Lemon* test
in the Establishment Clause context). Often, with these balancing texts,
the Court is criticized for doing little more than reading justices' own
beliefs about political morality into the Constitution, and in doing so,
infringing on the legislative role. However, is the *Matthews* test
special because procedural propriety is within the special purview of
the judicial branch?

The historical origins of due process begin with Magna Carta, which the
King of England was forced at swordpoint to sign in 1215. Chapter 39,
which is still law (as chapter 29) in Britain today, provides:

> No Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his
> Freehold, or Liberties, or free Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or
> any other wise destroyed; nor will We not pass upon him, nor condemn
> him, but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.
> We will sell to no man, we will not deny or defer to any man either
> Justice or Right.

For historical interest, the earliest use of the exact term "due
process" that the undersigned has been able to find (historians may know
of earlier uses) was in a statute of Edward III, from 1354, which
reaffirmed Magna Carta and then stated: "That no Man of what Estate or
Condition that he be, shall be put out of Land or Tenement, nor taken,
nor imprisoned, nor disinherited, nor put to Death, without being
brought in Answer by due Process of the Law."[^3] We can see, in this
passage, a clear forbear of our due process clause, including the
specific reference to life, liberty, and property interests as well as
the reference to due process; it's also clear from this statute that a
*procedural* notion of due process is meant: the citizen is to be
"brought in answer," that is, called to some kind of hearing to explain
his or her side of things.

That last sentence may seem mystifying. How could due process be other
than procedural? It has the word "process" right in the name. Yet, as
you will shortly learn (if you haven't already), there's also a thing
called "substantive due process," which protects fundamental rights from
infringement with or without procedural protections. Many scholars as
well as judges have questioned the coherence of such an idea; this
debate, as well as the content of substantive due process, are beyond
the scope of this document. Be careful, however, to clearly distinguish,
in your mind and on your exams, the two doctrines of *procedural* due
process and *substantive* due process. They are very different things.

**Table of Contents**

**Procedural Due Process, Separation of Powers, and Equality** 5

Londoner v. City and County of Denver, 210 U.S. 573 (1908) 5

Bi-Metallic Investment Co v. State Board of Equalization, 239 U.S. 441
(1915) 6

**The Fundamental Ideas and Values of Procedural Due Process** 9

Anti-Fascist Committee v. McGrath, 341 U.S. 123 (1951) 9

In re Complaint of Judicial Misconduct, 425 F.3d 1179 (9th Cir. 2005) 15

**Public Benefits and the Two Standard Questions** 17

Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254 (1970) 17

Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319 (1976) 22

**National Security** 27

Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 542 U.S. 507 (2004) 27

National Council of Resistance of Iran v. Department of State, 251 F.3d
192 (D.C. Cir., 2001) 32

**Public Employment** 39

Board of Regents v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564 (1972) 39

Cleveland Board of Education v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532 (1985) 41

**Blackslists, Control Orders, Reputational Harm** 45

Wisconsin v. Constantineau, 400 U.S. 433 (1971) 45

Paul v. Davis, 424 U.S. 693 (1976) 46

**Students** 49

Goss v. Lopez, 419 U.S. 565 (1975) 49

**Prisoners** 54

Sandin v. Conner, 515 U.S. 472 (1995) 54

**Emergencies** 56

In re A.C., 573 A.2d 1235 (D.C. App. 1990) 56

Pemberton v. Tallahassee Memorial Regional Medical Center, 66 F.Supp.2d
1247 (N.D. Fla. 1999) 57

**Impartial tribunals** 58

Caperton v. A. T. Massey Coal Co., 556 U.S. 868 (2009) 58

**Other Issues** 65

Notice of Civil Litigation 65

"Virtual Representation" and the Application of Claim and Issue
Preclusion to Nonparties 65

Driving 65

About the author 66

Change log 66

**Procedural Due Process, Separation of Powers, and Equality**

[Londoner v. City and County of Denver, 210 U.S. 573 (1908)]{.underline}

Mr. Justice Moody delivered the opinion of the court:

The plaintiffs in error began this proceeding in a state court of
Colorado to relieve lands owned by them from an assessment of a tax for
the cost of paving a street upon which the lands abutted.

The tax complained of was assessed under the provisions of the charter
of the city of Denver, which confers upon the city the power to make
local improvements and to assess the cost upon property specially
benefited.

\[\* \* \*\]

It appears from the charter that, in the execution of the power to make
local improvements and assess the cost upon the property specially
benefited, the main steps to be taken by the city authorities are
plainly marked and separated: 1. The board of public works must transmit
to the city council a resolution ordering the work to be done and the
form of an ordinance authorizing it and creating an assessment district.
This it can do only upon certain conditions, one of which is that there
shall first be filed a petition asking the improvement, signed by the
owners of the majority of the frontage to be assessed. 2. The passage of
that ordinance by the city council, which is given authority to
determine conclusively whether the action of the board was duly taken.
3. The assessment of the cost upon the landowners after due notice and
opportunity for hearing. In the case before us the board took the first
step by transmitting to the council the resolution to do the work and
the form of an ordinance authorizing it. It is contended, however, that
there was wanting an essential condition of the jurisdiction of the
board; namely, such a petition from the owners as the law requires. The
trial court found this contention to be true. But, as has been seen, the
charter gave the city council the authority to determine conclusively
that the improvements were duly ordered by the board after due notice
and a proper petition. In the exercise of this authority the city
council, in the ordinance directing the improvement to be made,
adjudged, in effect, that a proper petition had been filed. That
ordinance, after reciting a compliance by the board with the charter in
other respects, and that \'certain petitions for said improvements were
first presented to the said board, subscribed by the owners of a
majority of the frontage to be assessed for said improvements, as by the
city charter required,\' enacted \'That, upon consideration of the
premises, by city council doth find that, in their action and
proceedings in relation to said Eighth avenue paving district Number 1,
the said board of public works has fully complied with the requirements
of the city charter relating thereto.\' The state supreme court held
that the determination of the city council was conclusive that a proper
petition was filed, and that decision must be accepted by us as the law
of the state. The only question for this court is whether the charter
provision authorizing such a finding, without notice to the landowners,
denies to them due process of law. We think it does not. The
proceedings, from the beginning up to and including the passage of the
ordinance authorizing the work, did not include any assessment or
necessitate any assessment, although they laid the foundation for an
assessment, which might or might not subsequently be made. Clearly all
this might validly be done without hearing to the landowners, provided a
hearing upon the assessment itself is afforded. The legislature might
have authorized the making of improvements by the city council without
any petition. If it chose to exact a petition as a security for wise and
just action, it could, so far as the Federal Constitution is concerned,
accompany that condition with a provision that the council, with or
without notice, should determine finally whether it had been performed.

\[*Omitted: details of objections that plaintiffs tried to make in the
course of the assessment process.*\]

Instead of affording the plaintiffs in error an opportunity to be heard
upon its allegations, the city council, without notice to them, met as a
board of equalization, not in a stated, but in a specially called,
session, and, without any hearing, adopted the following resolution:

> \'Whereas, complaints have been filed by the various persons and firms
> as the owners of real estate included within the Eighth avenue paving
> district No. 1, of the city of Denver, against the proposed
> assessments on said property for the cost of said paving, the names
> and description of the real estate respectively owned by such persons
> being more particularly described in the various complaints filed with
> the city clerk; and
>
> \'Whereas, no complaint or objection has been filed or made against
> the apportionment of said assessment made by the board of public works
> of the city of Denver, but the complaints and objections filed deny
> wholly the right of the city to assess any district or portion of the
> assessable property of the city of Denver; therefore, be it
>
> \'Resolved, by the city council of the city of Denver, sitting as a
> board of equalization, that the apportionments of said assessment made
> by said board of public works be, and the same are hereby, confirmed
> and approved.\'

Subsequently, without further notice or hearing, the city council
enacted the ordinance of assessment whose validity is to be determined
in this case. The facts out of which the question on this assignment
arises may be compressed into small compass. The first step in the
assessment proceedings was by the certificate of the board of public
works of the cost of the improvement and a preliminary apportionment of
it. The last step was the enactment of the assessment ordinance. From
beginning to end of the proceedings the landowners, although allowed to
formulate and file complaints and objections, were not afforded an
opportunity to be heard upon them. Upon these facts, was there a denial
by the state of the due process of law guaranteed by the 14th Amendment
to the Constitution of the United States?

In the assessment, apportionment, and collection of taxes upon property
within their jurisdiction, the Constitution of the United States imposes
few restrictions upon the states. In the enforcement of such
restrictions as the Constitution does impose, this court has regarded
substance, and not form. But where the legislature of a state, instead
of fixing the tax itself, commits to some subordinate body the duty of
determining whether, in what amount, and upon whom it shall be levied,
and of making its assessment and apportionment, due process of law
requires that, at some stage of the proceedings, before the tax becomes
irrevocably fixed, the taxpayer shall have an opportunity to be heard,
of which he must have notice, either personal, by publication, or by a
law fixing the time and place of the hearing. It must be remembered that
the law of Colorado denies the landowner the right to object in the
courts to the assessment, upon the ground that the objections are
cognizable only by the board of equalization.

If it is enough that, under such circumstances, an opportunity is given
to submit in writing all objections to and complaints of the tax to the
board, then there was a hearing afforded in the case at bar. But we
think that something more than that, even in proceedings for taxation,
is required by due process of law. Many requirements essential in
strictly judicial proceedings may be dispensed with in proceedings of
this nature. But even here a hearing, in its very essence, demands that
he who is entitled to it shall have the right to support his allegations
by argument, however brief: and, if need be, by proof, however informal.

It is apparent that such a hearing was denied to the plaintiffs in
error.

The CHIEF JUSTICE and Mr. Justice Holmes dissent.

[Bi-Metallic Investment Co v. State Board of Equalization, 239 U.S. 441
(1915)]{.underline}

Mr. Justice Holmes delivered the opinion of the court:

This is a suit to enjoin the State Board of Equalization and the
Colorado Tax Commission from putting in force and the defendant Pitcher,
as assessor of Denver, from obeying, an order of the boards, increasing
the valuation of all taxable property in Denver 40 per cent. The order
was sustained and the suit directed to be dismissed by the supreme court
of the state. The plaintiff is the owner of real estate in Denver, and
brings the case here on the ground that it was given no opportunity to
be heard, and that therefore its property will be taken without due
process of law, contrary to the 14th Amendment of the Constitution of
the United States. That is the only question with which we have to deal.
There are suggestions on the one side that the construction of the state
Constitution and laws was an unwarranted surprise, and on the other,
that the decision might have been placed, although it was not, on the
ground that there was an adequate remedy at law. With these suggestions
we have nothing to do. They are matters purely of state law. The answer
to the former needs no amplification; that to the latter is that the
allowance of equitable relief is a question of state policy, and that as
the supreme court of the state treated the merits as legitimately before
it, we are not to speculate whether it might or might not have thrown
out the suit upon the preliminary ground.

For the purposes of decision we assume that the constitutional question
is presented in the baldest way,---that neither the plaintiff nor the
assessor of Denver, who presents a brief on the plaintiff\'s side, nor
any representative of the city and county, was given an opportunity to
be heard, other than such as they may have had by reason of the fact
that the time of meeting of the boards is fixed by law. On this
assumption it is obvious that injustice may be suffered if some property
in the county already has been valued at its full worth. But if certain
property has been valued at a rate different from that generally
prevailing in the county, the owner has had his opportunity to protest
and appeal as usual in our system of taxation, so that it must be
assumed that the property owners in the county all stand alike. The
question, then, is whether all individuals have a constitutional right
to be heard before a matter can be decided in which all are equally
concerned, here, for instance, before a superior board decides that the
local taxing officers have adopted a system of undervaluation throughout
a county, as notoriously often has been the case. The answer of this
court in the State R. Tax Cases, , at least, as to any further notice,
was that it was hard to believe that the proposition was seriously made.

Where a rule of conduct applies to more than a few people, it is
impracticable that everyone should have a direct voice in its adoption.
The Constitution does not require all public acts to be done in town
meeting or an assembly of the whole. General statutes within the state
power are passed that affect the person or property of individuals,
sometimes to the point of ruin, without giving them a chance to be
heard. Their rights are protected in the only way that they can be in a
complex society, by their power, immediate or remote, over those who
make the rule. If the result in this case had been reached, as it might
have been by the state\'s doubling the rate of taxation, no one would
suggest that the 14th Amendment was violated unless every person
affected had been allowed an opportunity to raise his voice against it
before the body intrusted by the state Constitution with the power. In
considering this case in this court we must assume that the proper state
machinery has been used, and the question is whether, if the state
Constitution had declared that Denver had been undervalued as compared
with the rest of the state, and had decreed that for the current year
the valuation should be 40 per cent higher, the objection now urged
could prevail. It appears to us that to put the question is to answer
it. There must be a limit to individual argument in such matters if
government is to go on. In Londoner v. Denver, a local board had to
determine \'whether, in what amount, and upon whom\' a tax for paving a
street should be levied for special benefits. A relatively small number
of persons was concerned, who were exceptionally affected, in each case
upon individual grounds, and it was held that they had a right to a
hearing. But that decision is far from reaching a general determination
dealing only with the principle upon which all the assessments in a
county had been laid.

Judgment affirmed

**Notes on Londoner & Bi-Metallic**

1\. *Procedural due Process and Separation of Powers*. Ordinarily, we
think that the role of the legislature is to enact general law, while
the role of the judiciary is to apply law to specific cases. This
division of responsibility is reflected across other constitutional
provisions, most prominently the prohibition on bills of attainder.
However, it is not uniformly maintained: consider, *inter alia*, the
power of impeachment and the occasional enactment of private bills. The
latter are rarely used, but are not completely extinct. As recently as
2012, Congress enacted, and the President signed, a private bill
granting an exception to U.S. residency requirements to Victor
Chukwueke, a Nigerian medical student.

These non-general uses of the legislative power raise procedural due
process issues. We can read *Londoner* and *Bi-Metallic* together to
suggest that when a legislative body moves from enacting general laws to
directly regulating identifiable individuals, it is subject to
procedural due process scrutiny. In the case of punitive law, the bill
of attainder clause provides even stronger protection than due process,
banning legislative action altogether. However, *Londoner* demonstrates
that legislature might impair specific people's life, liberty, or
property interests in non-punitive ways.

2\. *General Law and Equal Protection*. Why might we worry about
legislatures making non-general enactments? One version of the concern
is that legislatures might lash out against disfavored individuals or
classes. In that way, the application of procedural due process to
legislative acts appears to be a way of enforcing the ideals also
expressed in the Equal Protection Clause. Should the courts give greater
procedural due process scrutiny to enactments targeting members of
unpopular groups or political minorities?

3\. *An appearance in the takings context*? Consider the following text
from Justice Rehnquist's dissent in *Penn Central Transportation Co. v.
New York City*, 438 U.S. 104 (1978). At the broadest level of
abstraction, the same idea seems to be in play: legislative action
targeting specific individuals really isn't an exercise of the
legislative power at all; even though a legislature has the power to
modify *all* property rights, *acting legislatively through general
law*, it does not have the power to modify *an individual's* property
rights without compensation:

> Even where the government prohibits a noninjurious use, the Court has
> ruled that a taking does not take place if the prohibition applies
> over a broad cross-section of land, and thereby \"secure\[s\] an
> average reciprocity of advantage.\" It is for this reason that zoning
> does not constitute a \"taking.\" While zoning at times reduces
> *individual* property values, the burden is shared relatively evenly,
> and it is reasonable to conclude that, on the whole, an individual who
> is harmed by one aspect of the zoning will be benefited by another.
>
> Here, however, a multimillion dollar loss has been imposed on
> appellants; it is uniquely felt, and is not offset by any benefits
> flowing from the preservation of some 400 other \"landmarks\" in New
> York City. Appellees have imposed a substantial cost on less than one
> one-tenth of one percent of the buildings in New York City for the
> general benefit of all its people. It is exactly this imposition of
> general costs on a few individuals at which the \"taking\" protection
> is directed. The Fifth Amendment "prevents the public from loading
> upon one individual more than his just share of the burdens of
> government, and says that, when he surrenders to the public something
> more and different from that which is exacted from other members of
> the public, a full and just equivalent shall be returned to him."
> *Monongahela Navigation Co. v. United States.* Less than 20 years ago,
> this Court reiterated that the Fifth Amendment's guarantee that
> private property shall not be taken for a public use without just
> compensation was designed to bar Government from forcing some people
> alone to bear public burdens which, in all fairness and justice,
> should be borne by the public as a whole.

4\. *Federalism Constraints on Procedural Due Process*. We've seen what
happens when the federal courts are asked to review decisions of state
and local legislative bodies. What happens when they're asked to review,
for their procedural legitimacy, decisions of the state *courts*? The
simple answer is nothing: the Rooker-Feldman doctrine prohibits
collateral attack in the federal courts for state court judgments
(absent particular Congressional authorization, as in *habeas corpus*),
even when the state court judgments are alleged to be procedurally
deficient. For an example, see *Pemberton v. Tallahassee Memorial
Regional Medical Center*, 66 F.Supp.2d 1247 (N.D. Fla. 1999), in which
the court rejected a procedural due process challenge to a state
court-ordered medical procedure, and told the petitioner that her only
remedy was an appeal through the state court system, and, ultimately, to
the U.S. Supreme Court. However, Rooker-Feldman is generally understood
to be statutory, not constitutional: Congress could grant the district
courts jurisdiction over such cases.

5\. *Further reading*. For a skeptical discussion of the possibility of
making formal distinctions between general and non-general laws, and the
importance of coming up with some non-formal way of carrying out the
task see Paul Gowder, *Equal Law in an Unequal World*, [Iowa Law
Review]{.smallcaps} forthcoming (2014). For further thoughts on the
relationship between due process and separation of powers, see Nathan
Chapman & Michael McConnell, *Due Process as Separation of Powers*, 121
[Yale Law Journal]{.smallcaps} 1672 (2012).

The Fundamental Ideas and Values of Procedural Due Process
----------------------------------------------------------

### 

### Anti-Fascist Committee v. McGrath, 341 U.S. 123 (1951)

MR. JUSTICE FRANKFURTER, concurring.

\[\*\*\*\] Petitioners are organizations which, on the face of the
record, are engaged solely in charitable or insurance activities. They
have been designated \"communist\" by the Attorney General of the United
States. This designation imposes no legal sanction on these
organizations other than that it serves as evidence in ridding the
Government of persons reasonably suspected of disloyalty. It would be
blindness, however, not to recognize that in the conditions of our time
such designation drastically restricts the organizations, if it does not
proscribe them. Potential members, contributors or beneficiaries of
listed organizations may well be influenced by use of the designation,
for instance, as ground for rejection of applications for commissions in
the armed forces or for permits for meetings in the auditoriums of
public housing projects. Yet, designation has been made without notice,
without disclosure of any reasons justifying it, without opportunity to
meet the undisclosed evidence or suspicion on which designation may have
been based, and without opportunity to establish affirmatively that the
aims and acts of the organization are innocent. It is claimed that thus
to maim or decapitate, on the mere say-so of the Attorney General, an
organization to all outward-seeming engaged in lawful objectives is so
devoid of fundamental fairness as to offend the Due Process Clause of
the Fifth Amendment.

Fairness of procedure is \"due process in the primary sense.\" It is
ingrained in our national traditions and is designed to maintain them.
In a variety of situations the Court has enforced this requirement by
checking attempts of executives, legislatures, and lower courts to
disregard the deep-rooted demands of fair play enshrined in the
Constitution. \"\[B\]y \`due process\' is meant one which, following the
forms of law, is appropriate to the case, and just to the parties to be
affected. It must be pursued in the ordinary mode prescribed by the law;
it must be adapted to the end to be attained; and wherever it is
necessary for the protection of the parties, it must give them an
opportunity to be heard respecting the justice of the judgment sought.\"
\[\*\*\*\]

The requirement of \"due process\" is not a fair-weather or timid
assurance. It must be respected in periods of calm and in times of
trouble; it protects aliens as well as citizens. But \"due process,\"
unlike some legal rules, is not a technical conception with a fixed
content unrelated to time, place and circumstances. Expressing as it
does in its ultimate analysis respect enforced by law for that feeling
of just treatment which has been evolved through centuries of
Anglo-American constitutional history and civilization, \"due process\"
cannot be imprisoned within the treacherous limits of any formula.
Representing a profound attitude of fairness between man and man, and
more particularly between the individual and government, \"due process\"
is compounded of history, reason, the past course of decisions, and
stout confidence in the strength of the democratic faith which we
profess. Due process is not a mechanical instrument. It is not a
yardstick. It is a process. It is a delicate process of adjustment
inescapably involving the exercise of judgment by those whom the
Constitution entrusted with the unfolding of the process.

\[\*\*\*\]

\[P\]ublicly designating an organization as within the proscribed
categories of the Loyalty Order does not directly deprive anyone of
liberty or property. Weight must also be given to the fact that such
designation is not made by a minor official but by the highest law
officer of the Government.

\[\*\*\*\] Achievements of our civilization as precious as they were
hard won were summarized by Mr. Justice Brandeis when he wrote that \"in
the development of our liberty insistence upon procedural regularity has
been a large factor.\" It is noteworthy that procedural safeguards
constitute the major portion of our Bill of Rights. \[\*\*\*\]

It is against this background of guiding considerations that we must
view the rather novel aspects of the situation at hand. It is not true
that the evils against which the Loyalty Order was directed are wholly
devoid of analogy in our own history. The circumstances attending the
Napoleonic conflicts, which gave rise to the Sedition Act of 1798,
readily come to mind. But it is true that the executive action now under
scrutiny is of a sort not heretofore challenged in this Court. That of
itself does not justify the ex parte summary designation procedure. It
does make it necessary to consider its validity when judged by our whole
experience with the Due Process Clause.

The construction placed by this Court upon legislation conferring
administrative powers shows consistent respect for a requirement of fair
procedure before men are denied or deprived of rights. From a great mass
of cases, running the full gamut of control over property and liberty,
there emerges the principle that statutes should be interpreted, if
explicit language does not preclude, so as to observe due process in its
basic meaning. Fair hearings have been held essential for rate
determinations 10 and, generally, to deprive persons of property. An
opportunity to be heard is constitutionally necessary to deport persons
even though they make no claim of citizenship, and is accorded to aliens
seeking entry in the absence of specific directions to the contrary.
Even in the distribution by the Government of benefits that may be
withheld, the opportunity of a hearing is deemed important.

The high social and moral values inherent in the procedural safeguard of
a fair hearing are attested by the narrowness and rarity of the
instances when we have sustained executive action even though it did not
observe the customary standards of procedural fairness. It is in these
instances that constitutional compulsion regarding fair procedure was
directly in issue. Thus it has been held that the Constitution cannot be
invoked to prevent Congress from authorizing disbursements on the ex
parte determination of an administrative officer that prescribed
conditions are met. The importation of goods is a privilege which, if
Congress clearly so directs, may likewise be conditioned on ex parte
findings. Only by a close division of the Court was it held that at a
time of national emergency, when war has not been closed by formal
peace, the Attorney General is not required to give a hearing before
denying hospitality to an alien deemed dangerous to public security.
Again, when decisions of administrative officers in execution of
legislation turn exclusively on considerations similar to those on which
the legislative body could itself have acted summarily, notice and
hearing may not be commanded by the Constitution. Finally, summary
administrative procedure may be sanctioned by history or obvious
necessity. But these are so rare as to be isolated instances.

This Court is not alone in recognizing that the right to be heard before
being condemned to suffer grievous loss of any kind, even though it may
not involve the stigma and hardships of a criminal conviction, is a
principle basic to our society. Regard for this principle has guided
Congress and the Executive. Congress has often entrusted, as it may,
protection of interests which it has created to administrative agencies
rather than to the courts. But rarely has it authorized such agencies to
act without those essential safeguards for fair judgment which in the
course of centuries have come to be associated with due process. And
when Congress has given an administrative agency discretion to determine
its own procedure, the agency has rarely chosen to dispose of the rights
of individuals without a hearing, however informal.

The heart of the matter is that democracy implies respect for the
elementary rights of men, however suspect or unworthy; a democratic
government must therefore practice fairness; and fairness can rarely be
obtained by secret, one-sided determination of facts decisive of rights.

An opportunity to be heard may not seem vital when an issue relates only
to technical questions susceptible of demonstrable proof on which
evidence is not likely to be overlooked and argument on the meaning and
worth of conflicting and cloudy data not apt to be helpful. But in other
situations an admonition of Mr. Justice Holmes becomes relevant. \"One
has to remember that when one\'s interest is keenly excited evidence
gathers from all sides around the magnetic point . . . .\" It should be
particularly heeded at times of agitation and anxiety, when fear and
suspicion impregnate the air we breathe. Compare Brown, The French
Revolution in English History. \"The plea that evidence of guilt must be
secret is abhorrent to free men, because it provides a cloak for the
malevolent, the misinformed, the meddlesome, and the corrupt to play the
role of informer undetected and uncorrected.\" Appearances in the dark
are apt to look different in the light of day.

Man being what he is cannot safely be trusted with complete immunity
from outward responsibility in depriving others of their rights. At
least such is the conviction underlying our Bill of Rights. That a
conclusion satisfies one\'s private conscience does not attest its
reliability. The validity and moral authority of a conclusion largely
depend on the mode by which it was reached. Secrecy is not congenial to
truth-seeking and self- righteousness gives too slender an assurance of
rightness. No better instrument has been devised for arriving at truth
than to give a person in jeopardy of serious loss notice of the case
against him and opportunity to meet it. Nor has a better way been found
for generating the feeling, so important to a popular government, that
justice has been done.

The strength and significance of these considerations - considerations
which go to the very ethos of the scheme of our society - give a ready
answer to the problem before us. That a hearing has been thought
indispensable in so many other situations, leaving the cases of denial
exceptional, does not of itself prove that it must be found essential
here. But it does place upon the Attorney General the burden of showing
weighty reason for departing in this instance from a rule so deeply
imbedded in history and in the demands of justice.

\[\*\*\*\] The Attorney General is certainly not immune from the
historic requirements of fairness merely because he acts, however
conscientiously, in the name of security. Nor does he obtain immunity on
the ground that designation is not an \"adjudication\" or a
\"regulation\" in the conventional use of those terms. Due process is
not confined in its scope to the particular forms in which rights have
heretofore been found to have been curtailed for want of procedural
fairness. Due process is perhaps the most majestic concept in our whole
constitutional system. While it contains the garnered wisdom of the past
in assuring fundamental justice, it is also a living principle not
confined to past instances.

MR. JUSTICE DOUGLAS, concurring.

I disagree with MR. JUSTICE JACKSON that an organization - whether it be
these petitioners, the American Red Cross, the Catholic Church, the
Masonic Order, or the Boy Scouts - has no standing to object to being
labeled \"subversive\" in these ex parte proceedings. The opinion of MR.
JUSTICE FRANKFURTER disposes of that argument. This is not an instance
of name calling by public officials. This is a determination of status -
a proceeding to ascertain whether the organization is or is not
\"subversive.\" This determination has consequences that are serious to
the condemned organizations. Those consequences flow in part, of course,
from public opinion. But they also flow from actions of regulatory
agencies that are moving in the wake of the Attorney General\'s
determination to penalize or police these organizations. An organization
branded as \"subversive\" by the Attorney General is maimed and
crippled. The injury is real, immediate, and incalculable.

The requirements for fair trials under our system of government need no
elaboration. A party is entitled to know the charge against him; he is
also entitled to notice and opportunity to be heard. Those principles
were, in my opinion, violated here.

\[\*\*\*\] No one can tell from the Executive Order what meaning is
intended. No one can tell from the records of the cases which one the
Attorney General applied. The charge is flexible; it will mean one thing
to one officer, another to someone else. It will be given meaning
according to the predilections of the prosecutor: \"subversive\" to some
will be synonymous with \"radical\"; \"subversive\" to others will be
synonymous with \"communist.\" It can be expanded to include those who
depart from the orthodox party line - to those whose words and actions
(though completely loyal) do not conform to the orthodox view on foreign
or domestic policy. These flexible standards, which vary with the mood
or political philosophy of the prosecutor, are weapons which can be made
as sharp or as blunt as the occasion requires. Since they are subject to
grave abuse, they have no place in our system of law. When we employ
them, we plant within our body politic the virus of the totalitarian
ideology which we oppose.

It is not enough to know that the men applying the standard are
honorable and devoted men. This is a government of laws, not of men. The
powers being used are the powers of government over the reputations and
fortunes of citizens. In situations far less severe or important than
these a party is told the nature of the charge against him. Thus when a
defendant is summoned before a federal court to answer to a claim for
damages or to a demand for an injunction against him, there must be a
\"plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to
relief.\" If that is necessary for even the most minor claim asserted
against a defendant, we should require no less when it comes to
determinations that may well destroy the group against whom the charge
of being \"subversive\" is directed. When the Government becomes the
moving party and levels its great powers against the citizen, it should
be held to the same standards of fair dealing as we prescribe for other
legal contests. To let the Government adopt such lesser ones as suits
the convenience of its officers is to start down the totalitarian path.

\[\*\*\*\]

Notice and opportunity to be heard are fundamental to due process of
law. We would reverse these cases out of hand if they were suits of a
civil nature to establish a claim against petitioners. \[\*\*\*\] The
gravity of the present charges is proof enough of the need for notice
and hearing before the United States officially brands these
organizations as \"subversive.\" No more critical governmental ruling
can be made against an organization these days. It condemns without
trial. It destroys without opportunity to be heard. The condemnation may
in each case be wholly justified. But government in this country cannot
by edict condemn or place beyond the pale. The rudiments of justice, as
we know it, call for notice and hearing - an opportunity to appear and
to rebut the charge.

The system used to condemn these organizations is bad enough. The evil
is only compounded when a government employee is charged with being
disloyal. Association with or membership in an organization found to be
\"subversive\" weighs heavily against the accused. He is not allowed to
prove that the charge against the organization is false. That case is
closed; that line of defense is taken away. The technique is one of
guilt by association - one of the most odious institutions of history.
The fact that the technique of guilt by association was used in the
prosecutions at Nuremberg does not make it congenial to our
constitutional scheme. Guilt under our system of government is personal.
When we make guilt vicarious we borrow from systems alien to ours and
ape our enemies. Those short-cuts may at times seem to serve noble aims;
but we depreciate ourselves by indulging in them. When we deny even the
most degraded person the rudiments of a fair trial, we endanger the
liberties of everyone. We set a pattern of conduct that is dangerously
expansive and is adaptable to the needs of any majority bent on
suppressing opposition or dissension.

It is not without significance that most of the provisions of the Bill
of Rights are procedural. It is procedure that spells much of the
difference between rule by law and rule by whim or caprice. Steadfast
adherence to strict procedural safeguards is our main assurance that
there will be equal justice under law. The case of Dorothy Bailey is an
excellent illustration of how dangerous a departure from our
constitutional standards can be. She was charged with being a Communist
and with being active in a Communist \"front organization.\" The Review
Board stated that the case against her was based on reports, some of
which came from \"informants certified to us by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation as experienced and entirely reliable.\"

Counsel for Dorothy Bailey asked that their names be disclosed. That was
refused.

Counsel for Dorothy Bailey asked if these informants had been active in
a certain union. The chairman replied, \"I haven\'t the slightest
knowledge as to who they were or how active they have been in
anything.\"

Counsel for Dorothy Bailey asked if those statements of the informants
were under oath. The chairman answered, \"I don\'t think so.\"

The Loyalty Board convicts on evidence which it cannot even appraise.
The critical evidence may be the word of an unknown witness who is \"a
paragon of veracity, a knave, or the village idiot.\" His name, his
reputation, his prejudices, his animosities, his trustworthiness are
unknown both to the judge and to the accused. The accused has no
opportunity to show that the witness lied or was prejudiced or venal.
Without knowing who her accusers are she has no way of defending. She
has nothing to offer except her own word and the character testimony of
her friends.

Dorothy Bailey was not, to be sure, faced with a criminal charge and
hence not technically entitled under the Sixth Amendment to be
confronted with the witnesses against her. But she was on trial for her
reputation, her job, her professional standing. A disloyalty trial is
the most crucial event in the life of a public servant. If condemned, he
is branded for life as a person unworthy of trust or confidence. To make
that condemnation without meticulous regard for the decencies of a fair
trial is abhorrent to fundamental justice.

I do not mean to imply that but for these irregularities the system of
loyalty trials is constitutional. I do not see how the constitutionality
of this dragnet system of loyalty trials which has been entrusted to the
administrative agencies of government can be sustained. Every government
employee must take an oath of loyalty. 6 If he swears falsely, he
commits perjury and can be tried in court. In such a trial he gets the
full protection of the Bill of Rights, including trial by jury and the
presumption of innocence. I am inclined to the view that when a
disloyalty charge is substituted for perjury and an administrative board
substituted for the court \"the spirit and the letter of the Bill of
Rights\" are offended.

The problem of security is real; and the Government need not be
paralyzed in handling it. The security problem, however, relates only to
those sensitive areas where secrets are or may be available, where
critical policies are being formulated, or where sabotage can be
committed. The department heads must have leeway in handling their
personnel problems in these sensitive areas. The question is one of the
fitness or qualifications of an individual for a particular position.
One can be transferred from those areas even when there is no more than
a suspicion as to his loyalty. We meet constitutional difficulties when
the Government undertakes to punish by proclaiming the disloyalty of an
employee and making him ineligible for any government post. The British
have avoided those difficulties by applying the loyalty procedure only
in sensitive areas and in using it to test the qualifications of an
employee for a particular post, not to condemn him for all public
employment. When we go beyond that procedure and adopt the dragnet
system now in force, we trench upon the civil rights of our people. We
condemn by administrative edict, rather than by jury trial. Of course,
no one has a constitutional right to a government job. But every citizen
has a right to a fair trial when his government seeks to deprive him of
the privileges of first-class citizenship.

MR. JUSTICE BLACK, concurring.

Without notice or hearing and under color of the President\'s Executive
Order No. 9835, the Attorney General found petitioners guilty of
harboring treasonable opinions and designs, officially branded them as
Communists, and promulgated his findings and conclusions for particular
use as evidence against government employees suspected of disloyalty. In
the present climate of public opinion it appears certain that the
Attorney General\'s much publicized findings, regardless of their truth
or falsity, are the practical equivalents of confiscation and death
sentences for any blacklisted organization not possessing extraordinary
financial, political or religious prestige and influence. The Government
not only defends the power of the Attorney General to pronounce such
deadly edicts but also argues that individuals or groups so condemned
have no standing to seek redress in the courts, even though a fair
judicial hearing might conclusively demonstrate their loyalty. \[\* \*
\*\]

More fundamentally, however, in my judgment the executive has no
constitutional authority, with or without a hearing, officially to
prepare and publish the lists challenged by petitioners. In the first
place, the system adopted effectively punishes many organizations and
their members merely because of their political beliefs and utterances,
and to this extent smacks of a most evil type of censorship. This cannot
be reconciled with the First Amendment as I interpret it. Moreover,
officially prepared and proclaimed governmental blacklists possess
almost every quality of bills of attainder, the use of which was from
the beginning forbidden to both national and state governments. It is
true that the classic bill of attainder was a condemnation by the
legislature following investigation by that body, while in the present
case the Attorney General performed the official tasks. But I cannot
believe that the authors of the Constitution, who outlawed the bill of
attainder, inadvertently endowed the executive with power to engage in
the same tyrannical practices that had made the bill such an odious
institution.

There is argument that executive power to issue these pseudo-bills of
attainder can be implied from the undoubted power of the Government to
hire and discharge employees and to protect itself against treasonable
individuals or organizations. Our basic law, however, wisely withheld
authority for resort to executive investigations, condemnations and
blacklists as a substitute for imposition of legal types of penalties by
courts following trial and conviction in accordance with procedural
safeguards of the Bill of Rights.

***Notes on McGrath***:

1\. Students should attend to the fact that only the concurring opinions
are presented here (i.e., this is not the governing law).

2\. How do Justice Black's critiques of the anti-communist "blacklist"
at issue in *McGrath* bear on current anti-terrorist practices? Is it
relevant to Black's objections that the list was published? Suppose a
secret blacklist were created (e.g., the TSA "no-fly list") -- should
listees be entitled to notice and an opportunity to be heard?

3\. What relationship do the opinions suggest between the First
Amendment and procedural due process? (Note especially Justice Douglas's
remarks about the vagueness of the standards for designating an
organization as subversive, and the consequent susceptibility of abuse.

4\. Justice Douglas suggests that "Steadfast adherence to strict
procedural safeguards is our main assurance that there will be equal
justice under law." What's the relationship between procedural propriety
and equal justice?

[In re Complaint of Judicial Misconduct, 425 F.3d 1179 (9^th^ Cir. 2005)
(Kozinski, dissenting)]{.underline}

Many of the facts are already public, having been discussed by the court
of appeals in *In re Canter*. Canter grew out of a bankruptcy case
involving Deborah Canter who, at the time, was undergoing a messy
divorce from her husband Gary. During their married life, the couple had
lived in a house on Highland Avenue in Los Angeles; the house was owned
by Gary\'s parents, who transferred title to the Canter Family Trust in
1997. Gary paid rent while he and Deborah were living there. When the
couple separated in 1999, Gary moved out, leaving Deborah in possession;
the rent payments stopped.

The Trust brought an unlawful-detainer action against Deborah seeking
eviction and back rent, and the case was set for trial on October 26,
1999. Twenty-four minutes before trial was to start, Deborah filed a
bankruptcy petition, which automatically stayed the unlawful-detainer
case.

Three months later, on January 26, 2000, the bankruptcy court lifted the
automatic stay on a motion filed by the Trust. Deborah, represented by
attorney Andrew Smyth, did not file an opposition. Thereafter, the Trust
and Deborah\--again represented by counsel\--signed a stipulation. Based
on that stipulation, the state unlawful-detainer court on February 7,
2000, ordered Deborah to vacate the Highland Avenue premises.

At that point, lightning struck. Without notice, without warning,
without giving the Trust an opportunity to oppose, without so much as a
motion, the district judge who is now the subject of this disciplinary
complaint withdrew the case from the bankruptcy court. Twelve days
later, the same judge entered a second order, enjoining the state-court
judgment evicting Deborah. Like the withdrawal order, the injunction was
not preceded by the usual processes to which we are accustomed in
American courts, such as a petition from the party seeking the relief or
a response from the opposing side. In fact, no one knew why the district
judge had done what he did\--the order gave no reasons, cited no
authority, made no reference to a motion or other petition, imposed no
bond, balanced no equities. The two orders were a raw exercise of
judicial power, the net effect of which was to let Deborah Canter live
in the Highland Avenue property rent-free. Just how raw this exercise of
power was became clear\--if it was not already\--when the Trust twice
asked the judge to lift the stay, and was twice met by summary denials.

The so-called hearing on the second of these motions gives a pretty good
flavor of the judge\'s attitude in this matter. The motion (and an
unrelated motion) were argued together on June 18, 2001\--after Deborah
Canter had occupied the property for some 15 months past the eviction
judgment. Deborah was present (apparently pro se), but said nothing of
substance. After counsel for the Trust soliloquized for about a page of
transcript, we find the following unilluminating exchange:

THE COURT: Defendants\' motion to dismiss is denied, and the motion for
lifting of the stay is denied\--I\'m sorry. The motion to dismiss is
granted with ten days to amend.

MR. KATZ: And the motion to lift the stay is denied?

THE COURT: Denied; that\'s right.

MR. KATZ: May I ask the reasons, your Honor?

THE COURT: Just because I said it, Counsel.

I could stop right here and have no trouble concluding that the judge
committed misconduct. It is wrong and highly abusive for a judge to
exercise his power without the normal procedures and trappings of the
adversary system\--a motion, an opportunity for the other side to
respond, a statement of reasons for the decision, reliance on legal
authority. These niceties of orderly procedure are not designed merely
to ensure fairness to the litigants and a correct application of the
law, though they surely serve those purposes as well. More
fundamentally, they lend legitimacy to the judicial process by ensuring
that judicial action is\--and is seen to be\--based on law, not the
judge\'s caprice. The district judge surely had the power to enjoin
enforcement of the state-court eviction judgment once he assumed
jurisdiction over the bankruptcy case, but he could legitimately
exercise that power only if he had sufficient legal cause to do so.
Here, the judge gave no indication of why he did what he did, and
stonewalled all the Trust\'s efforts to find out.

Nor is there anything in the record that would suggest a legal basis for
the judge\'s action. Canter might have appealed the bankruptcy court\'s
order lifting the stay, but she didn\'t. She might also have filed a
motion asking the district court to withdraw the reference and enjoin
the state-court judgment. Had she done so, we could have gleaned from
her motion some legal theory supporting the injunction. But Canter
didn\'t do that either, so we\'re left in the dark as to what legal
basis the judge might have had for enjoining the state\'s lawful
processes. Judicial action taken without any arguable legal basis\--and
without giving notice and an opportunity to be heard to the party
adversely affected\--is far worse than simple error or abuse of
discretion; it\'s an abuse of judicial power that is \"prejudicial to
the effective and expeditious administration of the business of the
courts.\" \[\* \* \*\]

The fact of the matter is that the judge\'s conduct here caused real
harm. It certainly harmed innocent creditors to the tune of \$ 50,000 or
more. Worse, it harmed public confidence in the fair administration of
justice in the courts of this circuit. The prohibition against ex parte
communications, rules of procedure, principles of law\--all of these are
not trinkets that judges may discard whenever they become a nuisance.
Rather, they are the mainstays of our judicial system, our guarantee to
every litigant that we will administer justice, as our oath requires,
\"without respect to persons.\" *28 U.S.C. § 453*

**Notes on Values Underlying Procedural Due Process**

So why do we care about procedural due process, anyway? *McGrath* gives
us one idea. Procedural legitimacy is one way of treating citizens like
autonomous agents with dignity and worth, entitled to have reasons given
to them for their actions. In famous constitutional law scholar Lawrence
Tribe's words, "the right to be heard from, and the right to be told
why\... express the elementary idea that to be a *person*, rather than a
thing, is at least to be consulted about what is done with one."[^4] For
the consequence of abandoning procedural legitimacy, consider Franz
Kafka's *The Trial*.

Moreover, procedural legitimacy protects the value of equal justice. The
demand, captured in the Equal Protection Clause, that there should be
one law for all citizens, and all citizens should be treated equally
under the law, seems to require some sort of procedural regularity: only
if citizens have notice and an opportunity to be heard and receive
reasons for the actions done to them under the law can we be sure that
the law is really being applied evenhandedly. This seems to be
Kozinski's essential point in *In re Complaint of Judicial Misconduct*:
by abandoning the procedures of law, the accused judge made it
impossible for the litigants or the community at large to verify that
his rulings were genuinely impartial.

More broadly, legal philosophers speak of an idea that goes by the name
"the rule of law." The rule of law, loosely speaking, is that collection
of principles that ensures that we have "a government of law, not of
men," that is, that state power is constrained by public, general,
prospective laws. Conventionally, it is said that the rule of law
protects citizens' liberty, although the undersigned author has argued
that, actually, it protects the equality of all subjects of law in a
political community.[^5] Due process guarantees like notice and the
opportunity to be heard are widely understood to be elements of the rule
of law.[^6]

Public Benefits and the Two Standard Questions
----------------------------------------------

The two standard questions of procedural due process analysis are "is
there a protected interest," and, if so, "how much process is due?" As
is traditional, these are presented through the two leading cases
considering due process rights in the public benefits context.

### Goldberg v. Kelly, 397 U.S. 254 (1970)

MR. JUSTICE BRENNAN delivered the opinion of the Court.

The question for decision is whether a State that terminates public
assistance payments to a particular recipient without affording him the
opportunity for an evidentiary hearing prior to termination denies the
recipient procedural due process in violation of the Due Process Clause
of the Fourteenth Amendment.

\[\* \* \*\]

The constitutional issue to be decided, therefore, is the narrow one
whether the Due Process Clause requires that the recipient he afforded
an evidentiary hearing *before* the termination of benefits. The
District Court held that only a pre-termination evidentiary hearing
would satisfy the constitutional command, and rejected the argument of
the state and city officials that the combination of the
post-termination \"fair hearing\" with the informal pre-termination
review disposed of all due process claims.

\[\* \* \*\]

Appellant does not contend that procedural due process is not applicable
to the termination of welfare benefits. Such benefits are a matter of
statutory entitlement for persons qualified to receive them. Their
termination involves state action that adjudicates important rights. The
constitutional challenge cannot be answered by an argument that public
assistance benefits are \"a 'privilege,\' and not a \'right.\'\"
Relevant constitutional restraints apply as much to the withdrawal of
public assistance benefits as to disqualification for unemployment
compensation, or to denial of a tax exemption, or to discharge from
public employment. The extent to which procedural due process must be
afforded the recipient is influenced by the extent to which he may be
\"condemned to suffer grievous loss,\" *Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee
Committee v. McGrath*, and depends upon whether the recipient\'s
interest in avoiding that loss outweighs the governmental interest in
summary adjudication. Accordingly, as we said in *Cafeteria & Restaurant
Workers Union v. McElroy,* "consideration of what procedures due process
may require under any given set of circumstances must begin with a
determination of the precise nature of the government function involved,
as well as of the private interest that has been affected by
governmental action."

It is true, of course, that some governmental benefits may be
administratively terminated without affording the recipient a
pre-termination evidentiary hearing. But we agree with the District
Court that, when welfare is discontinued, only a pre-termination
evidentiary hearing provides the recipient with procedural due process.
For qualified recipients, welfare provides the means to obtain essential
food, clothing, housing, and medical care. Thus, the crucial factor in
this context \-- a factor not present in the case of the blacklisted
government contractor, the discharged government employee, the taxpayer
denied a tax exemption, or virtually anyone else whose governmental
entitlements are ended \-- is that termination of aid pending resolution
of a controversy over eligibility may deprive an eligible recipient of
the very means by which to live while he waits. Since he lacks
independent resources, his situation becomes immediately desperate. His
need to concentrate upon finding the means for daily subsistence, in
turn, adversely affects his ability to seek redress from the welfare
bureaucracy.

Moreover, important governmental interests are promoted by affording
recipients a pre-termination evidentiary hearing. From its founding, the
Nation\'s basic commitment has been to foster the dignity and wellbeing
of all persons within its borders. We have come to recognize that forces
not within the control of the poor contribute to their poverty. This
perception, against the background of our traditions, has significantly
influenced the development of the contemporary public assistance system.
Welfare, by meeting the basic demands of subsistence, can help bring
within the reach of the poor the same opportunities that are available
to others to participate meaningfully in the life of the community. At
the same time, welfare guards against the societal malaise that may flow
from a widespread sense of unjustified frustration and insecurity.
Public assistance, then, is not mere charity, but a means to \"promote
the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves
and our Posterity.\" The same governmental interests that counsel the
provision of welfare, counsel as well its uninterrupted provision to
those eligible to receive it; pre-termination evidentiary hearings are
indispensable to that end.

Appellant does not challenge the force of these considerations but
argues that they are outweighed by countervailing governmental interests
in conserving fiscal and administrative resources. These interests, the
argument goes, justify the delay of any evidentiary hearing until after
discontinuance of the grants. Summary adjudication protects the public
fisc by stopping payments promptly upon discovery of reason to believe
that a recipient is no longer eligible. Since most terminations are
accepted without challenge, summary adjudication also conserves both the
fisc and administrative time and energy by reducing the number of
evidentiary hearings actually held.

We agree with the District Court, however, that these governmental
interests are not overriding in the welfare context. The requirement of
a prior hearing doubtless involves some greater expense, and the
benefits paid to ineligible recipients pending decision at the hearing
probably cannot he recouped, since these recipients are likely to be
judgment-proof. But the State is not without weapons to minimize these
increased costs. Much of the drain on fiscal and administrative
resources can be reduced by developing procedures for prompt
pre-termination hearings and by skillful use of personnel and
facilities. Indeed, the very provision for a post-termination
evidentiary hearing in New York\'s Home Relief program is itself cogent
evidence that the State recognizes the primacy of the public interest in
correct eligibility determinations, and therefore in the provision of
procedural safeguards. Thus, the interest of the eligible recipient in
uninterrupted receipt of public assistance, coupled with the State\'s
interest that his payments not be erroneously terminated, clearly
outweighs the State\'s competing concern to prevent any increase in its
fiscal and administrative burdens. As the District Court correctly
concluded, "\[t\]he stakes are simply too high for the welfare
recipient, and the possibility for honest error or irritable misjudgment
too great, to allow termination of aid without giving the recipient a
chance, if he so desires, to be fully informed of the case against him
so that he may contest its basis and produce evidence in rebuttal."

We also agree with the District Court, however, that the pre-termination
hearing need not take the form of a judicial or *quasi*-judicial trial.
We bear in mind that the statutory \"fair hearing\" will provide the
recipient with a full administrative review. Accordingly, the
pre-termination hearing has one function only: to produce an initial
determination of the validity of the welfare department\'s grounds for
discontinuance of payments in order to protect a recipient against an
erroneous termination of his benefits. Thus, a complete record and a
comprehensive opinion, which would serve primarily to facilitate
judicial review and to guide future decisions, need not be provided at
the pre-termination stage. We recognize, too, that both welfare
authorities and recipients have an interest in relatively speedy
resolution of questions of eligibility, that they are used to dealing
with one another informally, and that some welfare departments have very
burdensome caseloads. These considerations justify the limitation of the
pre-termination hearing to minimum procedural safeguards, adapted to the
particular characteristics of welfare recipients, and to the limited
nature of the controversies to be resolved. We wish to add that we, no
less than the dissenters, recognize the importance of not imposing upon
the States or the Federal Government in this developing field of law any
procedural requirements beyond those demanded by rudimentary due
process.

\"The fundamental requisite of due process of law is the opportunity to
be heard.\" The hearing must be \"at a meaningful time and in a
meaningful manner.\" In the present context, these principles require
that a recipient have timely and adequate notice detailing the reasons
for a proposed termination, and an effective opportunity to defend by
confronting any adverse witnesses and by presenting his own arguments
and evidence orally. These rights are important in cases such as those
before us, where recipients have challenged proposed terminations as
resting on incorrect or misleading factual premises or on misapplication
of rules or policies to the facts of particular cases.

We are not prepared to say that the seven-day notice currently provided
by New York City is constitutionally insufficient *per se,* although
there may be cases where fairness would require that a longer time be
given. Nor do we see any constitutional deficiency in the content or
form of the notice. New York employs both a letter and a personal
conference with a caseworker to inform a recipient of the precise
questions raised about his continued eligibility. Evidently the
recipient is told the legal and factual bases for the Department\'s
doubts. This combination is probably the most effective method of
communicating with recipients.

The city\'s procedures presently do not permit recipients to appear
personally, with or without counsel, before the official who finally
determines continued eligibility. Thus, a recipient is not permitted to
present evidence to that official orally, or to confront or
cross-examine adverse witnesses. These omissions are fatal to the
constitutional adequacy of the procedures.

The opportunity to be heard must be tailored to the capacities and
circumstances of those who are to be heard. It is not enough that a
welfare recipient may present his position to the decisionmaker in
writing or second-hand through his caseworker. Written submissions are
an unrealistic option for most recipients, who lack the educational
attainment necessary to write effectively and who cannot obtain
professional assistance. Moreover, written submissions do not afford the
flexibility of oral presentations; they do not permit the recipient to
mold his argument to the issues the decisionmaker appears to regard as
important. Particularly where credibility and veracity are at issue, as
they must be in many termination proceedings, written submissions are a
wholly unsatisfactory basis for decision. The second-hand presentation
to the decisionmaker by the caseworker has its own deficiencies; since
the caseworker usually gathers the facts upon which the charge of
ineligibility rests, the presentation of the recipient\'s side of the
controversy cannot safely be left to him. Therefore, a recipient must be
allowed to state his position orally. Informal procedures will suffice;
in this context, due process does not require a particular order of
proof or mode of offering evidence.

In almost every setting where important decisions turn on questions of
fact, due process requires an opportunity to confront and cross-examine
adverse witnesses. What we said in \[p270\] *Greene v. McElroy,* is
particularly pertinent here:

"Certain principles have remained relatively immutable in our
jurisprudence. One of these is that, where governmental action seriously
injures an individual, and the reasonableness of the action depends on
fact findings, the evidence used to prove the Government\'s case must be
disclosed to the individual so that he has an opportunity to show that
it is untrue. While this is important in the case of documentary
evidence, it is even more important where the evidence consists of the
testimony of individuals whose memory might be faulty or who, in fact,
might be perjurers or persons motivated by malice, vindictiveness,
intolerance, prejudice, or jealousy. We have formalized these
protections in the requirements of confrontation and cross-examination.
They have ancient roots. They find expression in the Sixth Amendment. .
. . This Court has been zealous to protect these rights from erosion. It
has spoken out not only in criminal cases, . . . but also in all types
of cases where administrative . . . actions were under scrutiny."

Welfare recipients must therefore be given an opportunity to confront
and cross-examine the witnesses relied on by the department.

\"The right to be heard would be, in many cases, of little avail if it
did not comprehend the right to be heard by counsel.\" We do not say
that counsel must be provided at the pre-termination hearing, but only
that the recipient must be allowed to retain an attorney if he so
desires. Counsel can help delineate the issues, present the factual
contentions in an orderly manner, conduct cross-examination, and
generally safeguard the interests of the recipient. We do not anticipate
that this assistance will unduly prolong or otherwise encumber the
hearing. Evidently, HEW has reached the same conclusion.

Finally, the decisionmaker\'s conclusion as to a recipient\'s
eligibility must rest solely on the legal rules and evidence adduced at
the hearing. To demonstrate compliance with this elementary requirement,
the decisionmaker should state the reasons for his determination and
indicate the evidence he relied on, though his statement need not amount
to a full opinion, or even formal findings of fact and conclusions of
law. And, of course, an impartial decisionmaker is essential. We agree
with the District Court that prior involvement in some aspects of a case
will not necessarily bar a welfare official from acting as a
decisionmaker. He should not, however, have participated in making the
determination under review.

Footnote 8:

It may be realistic today to regard welfare entitlements as more like
\"property\" than a \"gratuity.\" Much of the existing wealth in this
country takes the form of rights that do not fall within traditional
common law concepts of property. It has been aptly noted that

> \[s\]ociety today is built around entitlement. The automobile dealer
> has his franchise, the doctor and lawyer their professional licenses,
> the worker his union membership, contract, and pension rights, the
> executive his contract and stock options; all are devices to aid
> security and independence. Many of the most important of these
> entitlements now flow from government: subsidies to farmers and
> businessmen, routes for airlines and channels for television stations;
> long-term contracts for defense, space, and education; social security
> pensions for individuals. Such sources of security, whether private or
> public, are no longer regarded as luxuries or gratuities; to the
> recipients, they are essentials, fully deserved, and in no sense a
> form of charity. It is only the poor whose entitlements, although
> recognized by public policy, have not been effectively enforced.

Reich, Individual Rights and Social Welfare: The Emerging Legal Issues,
74 Yale L.J. 1245, 1255 (1965). *See also* Reich, The New Property, 73
Yale L.J. 733 (1964).

From Justice Black's dissent:

The more than a million names on the relief rolls in New York, and the
more than nine million names on the rolls of all the 50 States were not
put there at random. The names are there because state welfare officials
believed that those people were eligible for assistance. Probably, in
the officials\' haste to make out the lists, many names were put there
erroneously in order to alleviate immediate suffering, and undoubtedly
some people are drawing relief who are not entitled under the law to do
so. Doubtless some draw relief checks from time to time who know they
are not eligible, either because they are not actually in need or for
some other reason. Many of those who thus draw undeserved gratuities are
without sufficient property to enable the government to collect back
from them any money they wrongfully receive. But the Court today holds
that it would violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment
to stop paying those people weekly or monthly allowances unless the
government first affords them a full \"evidentiary hearing,\" even
though welfare officials are persuaded that the recipients are not
rightfully entitled to receive a penny under the law. In other words,
although some recipients might be on the lists for payment wholly
because of deliberate fraud on their part, the Court holds that the
government is helpless, and must continue, until after an evidentiary
hearing, to pay money that it does not owe, never has owed, and never
could owe. I do not believe there is any provision in our Constitution
that should thus paralyze the government\'s efforts to protect itself
against making payments to people who are not entitled to them.

Particularly do I not think that the Fourteenth Amendment should be
given such an unnecessarily broad construction. That Amendment came into
being primarily to protect Negroes from discrimination, and while some
of its language can and does protect others, all know that the chief
purpose behind it was to protect ex-slaves. The Court, however, relies
upon the Fourteenth Amendment, and, in effect, says that failure of the
government to pay a promised charitable installment to an individual
deprives that individual of *his own property* in violation of the Due
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. It somewhat strains
credulity to say that the government\'s promise of charity to an
individual is property belonging to that individual when the government
denies that the individual is honestly entitled to receive such a
payment.

\[\* \* \*\]

The procedure required today as a matter of constitutional law finds no
precedent in our legal system. Reduced to its simplest terms, the
problem in this case is similar to that frequently encountered when two
parties have an ongoing legal relationship that requires one party to
make periodic payments to the other. Often the situation arises where
the party \"owing\" the money stops paying it and justifies his conduct
by arguing that the recipient is not legally entitled to payment. The
recipient can, of course, disagree and go to court to compel payment.
But I know of no situation in our legal system in which the person
alleged to owe money to another is required by law to continue making
payments to a judgment-proof claimant without the benefit of any
security or bond to insure that these payments can be recovered if he
wins his legal argument. Yet today\'s decision in no way obligates the
welfare recipient to pay back any benefits wrongfully received during
the pre-termination evidentiary hearings or post any bond, and, in all
\"fairness,\" it could not do so. These recipients are, by definition,
too poor to post a bond or to repay the benefits that, as the majority
assumes, must be spent as received to insure survival.

The Court apparently feels that this decision will benefit the poor and
needy. In my judgment, the eventual result will be just the opposite.
While today\'s decision requires only an administrative, evidentiary
hearing, the inevitable logic of the approach taken will lead to
constitutionally imposed, time-consuming delays of a full adversary
process of administrative and judicial review. In the next case, the
welfare recipients are bound to argue that cutting off benefits before
judicial review of the agency\'s decision is also a denial of due
process. Since, by hypothesis, termination of aid at that point may
still \"deprive an eligible recipient of the very means by which to live
while he waits,\" I would be surprised if the weighing process did not
compel the conclusion that termination without full judicial review
would be unconscionable. After all, at each step, as the majority seems
to feel, the issue is only one of weighing the government\'s pocketbook
against the actual survival of the recipient, and surely that balance
must always tip in favor of the individual. Similarly today\'s decision
requires only the opportunity to have the benefit of counsel at the
administrative hearing, but it is difficult to believe that the same
reasoning process would not require the appointment of counsel, for
otherwise the right to counsel is a meaningless one, since these people
are too poor to hire their own advocates. *Cf. Gideon v. Wainwright*.
Thus, the end result of today\'s decision may well be that the
government, once it decides to give welfare benefits, cannot reverse
that decision until the recipient has had the benefits of full
administrative and Judicial review, including, of course, the
opportunity to present his case to this Court. Since this process will
usually entail a delay of several years, the inevitable result of such a
constitutionally imposed burden will be that the government will not put
a claimant on the rolls initially until it has made an exhaustive
investigation to determine his eligibility. While this Court will
perhaps have insured that no needy person will be taken off the rolls
without a full \"due process\" proceeding, it will also have insured
that many will never get on the rolls, or at least that they will remain
destitute during the lengthy proceedings followed to determine initial
eligibility.

**Note on Goldberg**

The government gives out income benefits under numerous substantive
conditions all the time: recipients must have under a certain income,
must look for work, etc. Generally, the government gets an extremely
broad scope of discretion in where it spends its money (Compare *Rust v.
Sullivan*, 500 U.S. 173 (1991), holding that the government may
selectively subsidize private speakers on a viewpoint-discriminatory
basis.) Why can it not also give income benefits under *procedural*
conditions? Does it matter whether recipients may come to reasonably
rely on the benefits? Those who oppose the *Goldberg* rule might argue
that since the state can abolish income assistance benefits
altogether---as it undoubtedly can---it ought to be able to do *less*
than abolish them altogether, i.e., grant them only to those specific
people whom it chooses, and take them away from others, without offering
the latter a hearing. (Some element of the individualized/general
distinction from *Londoner* and *Bi-Metallic* appears to be at play
here, albeit transposed to the individual context: New York probably
could have shut off public benefits altogether, i.e., by gubernatorial
impoundment of the funds, without triggering an obligation to give
notice and a hearing to each individual affected. The transposition of
this idea to the administrative context is somewhat uncomfortable,
however, because administrative agencies typically exercise both
quasi-legislative and quasi-judicial functions.)

On the other hand, some political philosophers argue that the state
creates all property rights. At the very least, even those who believe
that there are natural law property rights must concede that state law
defines many of the details of those rights, and could define them
otherwise. For example, the rule against perpetuities constrains the
right to transfer property; states could (and most states have) made
that rule more or less strict. But given that all property interests are
(at least partly) defined by the state, and the due process clause
specifically protects property interests, it follows that state
legislative discretion over the contours of some interest does not give
a conclusive objection to applying procedural due process protections to
the individualized deprivation of that interest. For more on which
state-created interests are covered by the concept of "property" and
which are not, see *Board of Regents v. Roth*, presented below.

### Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319 (1976) 

MR. JUSTICE POWELL delivered the opinion of the Court.

The issue in this case is whether the Due Process Clause of the Fifth
Amendment requires that, prior to the termination of Social Security
disability benefit payments, the recipient be afforded an opportunity
for an evidentiary hearing.

Cash benefits are provided to workers during periods in which they are
completely disabled under the disability insurance benefits program
created by the 1956 amendments to Title II of the Social Security Act.
\[\*\*\*\] Eldridge commenced this action challenging the constitutional
validity of the administrative procedures established by the Secretary
of Health, Education, and Welfare for assessing whether there exists a
continuing disability. He sought an immediate reinstatement of benefits
pending a hearing on the issue of his disability. The Secretary moved to
dismiss on the grounds that Eldridge\'s benefits had been terminated in
accordance with valid administrative regulations and procedures and that
he had failed to exhaust available remedies. In support of his
contention that due process requires a pre-termination hearing, Eldridge
relied exclusively upon this Court\'s decision in Goldberg v. Kelly,
which established a right to an \"evidentiary hearing\" prior to
termination of welfare benefits. The Secretary contended that Goldberg
was not controlling, since eligibility for disability benefits, unlike
eligibility for welfare benefits, is not based on financial need, and
since issues of credibility and veracity do not play a significant role
in the disability entitlement decision, which turns primarily on medical
evidence.

\[\*\*\*\] \[T\]he Secretary contends that the existing administrative
procedures, detailed below, provide all the process that is
constitutionally due before a recipient can be deprived of that
interest.

This Court consistently has held that some form of hearing is required
before an individual is finally deprived of a property interest. The
right to be heard before being condemned to suffer grievous loss of any
kind, even though it may not involve the stigma and hardships of a
criminal conviction, is a principle basic to our society. The
fundamental requirement of due process is the opportunity to be heard
\"at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner.\" Eldridge agrees
that the review procedures available to a claimant before the initial
determination of ineligibility becomes final would be adequate if
disability benefits were not terminated until after the evidentiary
hearing stage of the administrative process. The dispute centers upon
what process is due prior to the initial termination of benefits,
pending review.

\[\*\*\*\] These decisions underscore the truism that \"'\[d\]ue
process,\' unlike some legal rules, is not a technical conception with a
fixed content unrelated to time, place and circumstances.\" \"\[D\]ue
process is flexible, and calls for such procedural protections as the
particular situation demands.\" Accordingly, resolution of the issue
whether the administrative procedures provided here are constitutionally
sufficient requires analysis of the governmental and private interests
that are affected. More precisely, our prior decisions indicate that
identification of the specific dictates of due process generally
requires consideration of three distinct factors: first, the private
interest that will be affected by the official action; second, the risk
of an erroneous deprivation of such interest through the procedures
used, and the probable value, if any, of additional or substitute
procedural safeguards; and, finally, the Government\'s interest,
including the function involved and the fiscal and administrative
burdens that the additional or substitute procedural requirement would
entail.

We turn first to a description of the procedures for the termination of
Social Security disability benefits, and thereafter consider the factors
bearing upon the constitutional adequacy of these procedures.

The disability insurance program is administered jointly by state and
federal agencies. State agencies make the initial determination whether
a disability exists, when it began, and when it ceased. \[\*\*\*\] The
continuing eligibility investigation is made by a state agency acting
through a \"team\" consisting of a physician and a nonmedical person
trained in disability evaluation. \[\*\*\*\] Whenever the agency\'s
tentative assessment of the beneficiary\'s condition differs from his
own assessment, the beneficiary is informed that benefits may be
terminated, provided a summary of the evidence upon which the proposed
determination to terminate is based, and afforded an opportunity to
review the medical reports and other evidence in his case file. He also
may respond in writing and submit additional evidence.

The state agency then makes its final determination, which is reviewed
by an examiner in the SSA Bureau of Disability Insurance. If, as is
usually the case, the SSA accepts the agency determination, it notifies
the recipient in writing, informing him of the reasons for the decision,
and of his right to seek de novo reconsideration by the state agency.
Upon acceptance by the SSA, benefits are terminated effective two months
after the month in which medical recovery is found to have occurred.

If the recipient seeks reconsideration by the state agency and the
determination is adverse, the SSA reviews the reconsideration
determination and notices the recipient of the decision. He then has a
right to an evidentiary hearing before an SSA administrative law judge.
The hearing is nonadversary, and the SSA is not represented by counsel.
As at all prior and subsequent stages of the administrative process,
however, the claimant may be represented by counsel or other spokesmen.
If this hearing results in an adverse decision, the claimant is entitled
to request discretionary review by the SSA Appeals Council, and finally
may obtain judicial review. Should it be determined at any point after
termination of benefits, that the claimant\'s disability extended beyond
the date of cessation initially established, the worker is entitled to
retroactive payments. \[\*\*\*\]

Despite the elaborate character of the administrative procedures
provided by the Secretary, the courts below held them to be
constitutionally inadequate, concluding that due process requires an
evidentiary hearing prior to termination. In light of the private and
governmental interests at stake here and the nature of the existing
procedures, we think this was error.

Since a recipient whose benefits are terminated is awarded full
retroactive relief if he ultimately prevails, his sole interest is in
the uninterrupted receipt of this source of income pending final
administrative decision on his claim. His potential injury is thus
similar in nature to that of the welfare recipient in Goldberg, the
nonprobationary federal employee in Arnett, and the wage earner in
Sniadach.

Only in Goldberg has the Court held that due process requires an
evidentiary hearing prior to a temporary deprivation. It was emphasized
there that welfare assistance is given to persons on the very margin of
subsistence: \[\"\]The crucial factor in this context \-- a factor not
present in the case of . . . virtually anyone else whose governmental
entitlements are ended \-- is that termination of aid pending resolution
of a controversy over eligibility may deprive an eligible recipient of
the very means by which to live while he waits.\[\"\]

Eligibility for disability benefits, in contrast, is not based upon
financial need. Indeed, it is wholly unrelated to the worker\'s income
or support from many other sources, such as earnings of other family
members, workmen\'s compensation awards, tort claims awards, sayings,
private insurance, public or private pensions, veterans\' benefits, food
stamps, public assistance, or the many other important programs, both
public and private, which contain provisions for disability payments
affecting a substantial portion of the workforce.

As Goldberg illustrates, the degree of potential deprivation that may be
created by a particular decision is a factor to be considered in
assessing the validity of any administrative decisionmaking process. The
potential deprivation here is generally likely to be less than in
Goldberg, although the degree of difference can be overstated. As the
District Court emphasized, to remain eligible for benefits, a recipient
must be \"unable to engage in substantial gainful activity.\" Thus, in
contrast to the discharged federal employee in Arnett, there is little
possibility that the terminated recipient will be able to find even
temporary employment to ameliorate the interim loss.

\[T\]he possible length of wrongful deprivation of . . . benefits
\[also\] is an important factor in assessing the impact of official
action on the private interests. The Secretary concedes that the delay
between a request for a hearing before an administrative law judge and a
decision on the claim is currently between 10 and 11 months. Since a
terminated recipient must first obtain a reconsideration decision as a
prerequisite to invoking his right to an evidentiary hearing, the delay
between the actual cutoff of benefits and final decision after a hearing
exceeds one year.

In view of the torpidity of this administrative review process, and the
typically modest resources of the family unit of the physically disabled
worker, the hardship imposed upon the erroneously terminated disability
recipient may be significant. Still, the disabled worker\'s need is
likely to be less than that of a welfare recipient. In addition to the
possibility of access to private resources, other forms of government
assistance will become available where the termination of disability
benefits places a worker or his family below the subsistence level. In
view of these potential sources of temporary income, there is less
reason here than in Goldberg to depart from the ordinary principle,
established by our decisions, that something less than an evidentiary
hearing is sufficient prior to adverse administrative action.

An additional factor to be considered here is the fairness and
reliability of the existing pre-termination procedures, and the probable
value, if any, of additional procedural safeguards. Central to the
evaluation of any administrative process is the nature of the relevant
inquiry. In order to remain eligible for benefits, the disabled worker
must demonstrate by means of \"medically acceptable clinical and
laboratory diagnostic techniques\" that he is unable \"to engage in any
substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable
physical or mental impairment. . . .\" In short, a medical assessment of
the worker\'s physical or mental condition is required. This is a more
sharply focused and easily documented decision than the typical
determination of welfare entitlement. In the latter case, a wide variety
of information may be deemed relevant, and issues of witness credibility
and veracity often are critical to the decisionmaking process. Goldberg
noted that, in such circumstances \"written submissions are a wholly
unsatisfactory basis for decision.\"

By contrast, the decision whether to discontinue disability benefits
will turn, in most cases, upon \"routine, standard, and unbiased medical
reports by physician specialists,\" concerning a subject whom they have
personally examined. In Richardson, the Court recognized the
\"reliability and probative worth of written medical reports,\"
emphasizing that, while there may be \"professional disagreement with
the medical conclusions\" the \"specter of questionable credibility and
veracity is not present.\" To be sure, credibility and veracity may be a
factor in the ultimate disability assessment in some cases. But
procedural due process rules are shaped by the risk of error inherent in
the truthfinding process as applied to the generality of cases, not the
rare exceptions. The potential value of an evidentiary hearing, or even
oral presentation to the decisionmaker, is substantially less in this
context than in Goldberg.

The decision in Goldberg also was based on the Court\'s conclusion that
written submissions were an inadequate substitute for oral presentation
because they did not provide an effective means for the recipient to
communicate his case to the decisionmaker. Written submissions were
viewed as an unrealistic option, for most recipients lacked the
\"educational attainment necessary to write effectively,\" and could not
afford professional assistance. In addition, such submissions would not
provide the \"flexibility of oral presentations\" or \"permit the
recipient to mold his argument to the issues the decisionmaker appears
to regard as important.\" In the context of the disability benefits
entitlement assessment, the administrative procedures under review here
fully answer these objections.

The detailed questionnaire which the state agency periodically sends the
recipient identifies with particularity the information relevant to the
entitlement decision, and the recipient is invited to obtain assistance
from the local SSA office in completing the questionnaire. More
important, the information critical to the entitlement decision usually
is derived from medical sources, such as the treating physician. Such
sources are likely to be able to communicate more effectively through
written documents than are welfare recipients or the lay witnesses
supporting their cause. The conclusions of physicians often are
supported by X-rays and the results of clinical or laboratory tests,
information typically more amenable to written than to oral
presentation.

A further safeguard against mistake is the policy of allowing the
disability recipient\'s representative full access to all information
relied upon by the state agency. In addition, prior to the cutoff of
benefits, the agency informs the recipient of its tentative assessment,
the reasons therefor, and provides a summary of the evidence that it
considers most relevant. Opportunity is then afforded the recipient to
submit additional evidence or arguments, enabling him to challenge
directly the accuracy of information in his file, as well as the
correctness of the agency\'s tentative conclusions. These procedures,
again as contrasted with those before the Court in Goldberg, enable the
recipient to \"mold\" his argument to respond to the precise issues
which the decisionmaker regards as crucial.

Despite these carefully structured procedures, amici point to the
significant reversal rate for appealed cases as clear evidence that the
current process is inadequate. Depending upon the base selected and the
line of analysis followed, the relevant reversal rates urged by the
contending parties vary from a high of 58.6% for appealed
reconsideration decisions to an overall reversal rate of only 3.3%. Bare
statistics rarely provide a satisfactory measure of the fairness of a
decisionmaking process. Their adequacy is especially suspect here, since
the administrative review system is operated on an open file basis. A
recipient may always submit new evidence, and such submissions may
result in additional medical examinations. Such fresh examinations were
held in approximately 30% to 40% of the appealed cases in fiscal 1973,
either at the reconsideration or evidentiary hearing stage of the
administrative process. In this context, the value of reversal rate
statistics as one means of evaluating the adequacy of the
pre-termination process is diminished. Thus, although we view such
information as relevant, it is certainly not controlling in this case.

In striking the appropriate due process balance, the final factor to be
assessed is the public interest. This includes the administrative burden
and other societal costs that would be associated with requiring, as a
matter of constitutional right, an evidentiary hearing upon demand in
all cases prior to the termination of disability benefits. The most
visible burden would be the incremental cost resulting from the
increased number of hearings and the expense of providing benefits to
ineligible recipients pending decision. No one can predict the extent of
the increase, but the fact that full benefits would continue until after
such hearings would assure the exhaustion in most cases of this
attractive option. Nor would the theoretical right of the Secretary to
recover undeserved benefits result, as a practical matter, in any
substantial offset to the added outlay of public funds. The parties
submit widely varying estimates of the probable additional financial
cost. We only need say that experience with the constitutionalizing of
government procedures suggests that the ultimate additional cost in
terms of money and administrative burden would not be insubstantial.

Financial cost alone is not a controlling weight in determining whether
due process requires a particular procedural safeguard prior to some
administrative decision. But the Government\'s interest, and hence that
of the public, in conserving scarce fiscal and administrative resources
is a factor that must be weighed. At some point, the benefit of an
additional safeguard to the individual affected by the administrative
action and to society in terms of increased assurance that the action is
just may be outweighed by the cost. Significantly, the cost of
protecting those whom the preliminary administrative process has
identified as likely to be found undeserving may, in the end, come out
of the pockets of the deserving, since resources available for any
particular program of social welfare are not unlimited.

But more is implicated in cases of this type than ad hoc weighing of
fiscal and administrative burdens against the interests of a particular
category of claimants. The ultimate balance involves a determination as
to when, under our constitutional system, judicial-type procedures must
be imposed upon administrative action to assure fairness. We reiterate
the wise admonishment of Mr. Justice Frankfurter that differences in the
origin and function of administrative agencies \"preclude wholesale
transplantation of the rules of procedure, trial, and review which have
evolved from the history and experience of courts.\" The judicial model
of an evidentiary hearing is neither a required, nor even the most
effective, method of decisionmaking in all circumstances. The essence of
due process is the requirement that \"a person in jeopardy of serious
loss \[be given\] notice of the case against him and opportunity to meet
it.\" All that is necessary is that the procedures be tailored, in light
of the decision to be made, to \"the capacities and circumstances of
those who are to be heard,\" to insure that they are given a meaningful
opportunity to present their case. In assessing what process is due in
this case, substantial weight must be given to the good faith judgments
of the individuals charged by Congress with the administration of social
welfare programs that the procedures they have provided assure fair
consideration of the entitlement claims of individuals. This is
especially so where, as here, the prescribed procedures not only provide
the claimant with an effective process for asserting his claim prior to
any administrative action, but also assure a right to an evidentiary
hearing, as well as to subsequent judicial review, before the denial of
his claim becomes final. We conclude that an evidentiary hearing is not
required prior to the termination of disability benefits, and that the
present administrative procedures fully comport with due process.

**Note on Matthews**

The court in *Matthews* considered a wide variety of factors in a
seemingly ad hoc fashion. What guidance can we draw as to how they may
be weighed against one another?

National Security
-----------------

### Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, 542 U.S. 507 (2004) (plurality opinion)

Justice O'Connor announced the judgment of the Court and delivered an
opinion, in which The Chief Justice, Justice Kennedy, and Justice Breyer
join.

At this difficult time in our Nation's history, we are called upon to
consider the legality of the Government's detention of a United States
citizen on United States soil as an "enemy combatant" and to address the
process that is constitutionally owed to one who seeks to challenge his
classification as such. The United States Court of Appeals for the
Fourth Circuit held that petitioner's detention was legally authorized
and that he was entitled to no further opportunity to challenge his
enemy-combatant label. We now vacate and remand. We hold that although
Congress authorized the detention of combatants in the narrow
circumstances alleged here, due process demands that a citizen held in
the United States as an enemy combatant be given a meaningful
opportunity to contest the factual basis for that detention before a
neutral decisionmaker.

On September 11, 2001, the al Qaeda terrorist network used hijacked
commercial airliners to attack prominent targets in the United States.
Approximately 3,000 people were killed in those attacks. One week later,
in response to these "acts of treacherous violence," Congress passed a
resolution authorizing the President to "use all necessary and
appropriate force against those nations, organizations, or persons he
determines planned, authorized, committed, or aided the terrorist
attacks" or "harbored such organizations or persons, in order to prevent
any future acts of international terrorism against the United States by
such nations, organizations or persons." Authorization for Use of
Military Force ("the AUMF"), 115 Stat. 224. Soon thereafter, the
President ordered United States Armed Forces to Afghanistan, with a
mission to subdue al Qaeda and quell the Taliban regime that was known
to support it.

This case arises out of the detention of a man whom the Government
alleges took up arms with the Taliban during this conflict. His name is
Yaser Esam Hamdi. Born an American citizen in Louisiana in 1980, Hamdi
moved with his family to Saudi Arabia as a child. By 2001, the parties
agree, he resided in Afghanistan. At some point that year, he was seized
by members of the Northern Alliance, a coalition of military groups
opposed to the Taliban government, and eventually was turned over to the
United States military. The Government asserts that it initially
detained and interrogated Hamdi in Afghanistan before transferring him
to the United States Naval Base in Guantanamo Bay in January 2002. In
April 2002, upon learning that Hamdi is an American citizen, authorities
transferred him to a naval brig in Norfolk, Virginia, where he remained
until a recent transfer to a brig in Charleston, South Carolina. The
Government contends that Hamdi is an "enemy combatant," and that this
status justifies holding him in the United States indefinitely--without
formal charges or proceedings--unless and until it makes the
determination that access to counsel or further process is warranted.

\[\* \* \*\]

On remand, the Government filed a response and a motion to dismiss the
petition. It attached to its response a declaration from one Michael
Mobbs (hereinafter "Mobbs Declaration"), who identified himself as
Special Advisor to the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy. \[\* \*
\*\]

Mobbs then set forth what remains the sole evidentiary support that the
Government has provided to the courts for Hamdi's detention. The
declaration states that Hamdi "traveled to Afghanistan" in July or
August 2001, and that he thereafter "affiliated with a Taliban military
unit and received weapons training." It asserts that Hamdi "remained
with his Taliban unit following the attacks of September 11" and that,
during the time when Northern Alliance forces were "engaged in battle
with the Taliban," "Hamdi's Taliban unit surrendered" to those forces,
after which he "surrender\[ed\] his Kalishnikov assault rifle" to them.
The Mobbs Declaration also states that, because al Qaeda and the Taliban
"were and are hostile forces engaged in armed conflict with the armed
forces of the United States," "individuals associated with" those groups
"were and continue to be enemy combatants." Mobbs states that Hamdi was
labeled an enemy combatant "\[b\]ased upon his interviews and in light
of his association with the Taliban." Ibid. According to the
declaration, a series of "U.S. military screening team\[s\]" determined
that Hamdi met "the criteria for enemy combatants," and "a subsequent
interview of Hamdi has confirmed that he surrendered and gave his
firearm to Northern Alliance forces, which supports his classification
as an enemy combatant."

\[\* \* \*\]

Even in cases in which the detention of enemy combatants is legally
authorized, there remains the question of what process is
constitutionally due to a citizen who disputes his enemy-combatant
status. Hamdi argues that he is owed a meaningful and timely hearing and
that "extra-judicial detention \[that\] begins and ends with the
submission of an affidavit based on third-hand hearsay" does not comport
with the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. The Government counters that
any more process than was provided below would be both unworkable and
"constitutionally intolerable." Our resolution of this dispute requires
a careful examination both of the writ of habeas corpus, which Hamdi now
seeks to employ as a mechanism of judicial review, and of the Due
Process Clause, which informs the procedural contours of that mechanism
in this instance.

Though they reach radically different conclusions on the process that
ought to attend the present proceeding, the parties begin on common
ground. All agree that, absent suspension, the writ of habeas corpus
remains available to every individual detained within the United States.
\[\* \* \*\] All agree suspension of the writ has not occurred here.
Thus, it is undisputed that Hamdi was properly before an Article III
court to challenge his detention under 28 U.S.C. § 2241.. Further, all
agree that §2241 and its companion provisions provide at least a
skeletal outline of the procedures to be afforded a petitioner in
federal habeas review. Most notably, §2243 provides that "the person
detained may, under oath, deny any of the facts set forth in the return
or allege any other material facts," and §2246 allows the taking of
evidence in habeas proceedings by deposition, affidavit, or
interrogatories.

The simple outline of §2241 makes clear both that Congress envisioned
that habeas petitioners would have some opportunity to present and rebut
facts and that courts in cases like this retain some ability to vary the
ways in which they do so as mandated by due process. The Government
recognizes the basic procedural protections required by the habeas
statute, but asks us to hold that, given both the flexibility of the
habeas mechanism and the circumstances presented in this case, the
presentation of the Mobbs Declaration to the habeas court completed the
required factual development. It suggests two separate reasons for its
position that no further process is due.

First, the Government urges the adoption of the Fourth Circuit's holding
below--that because it is "undisputed" that Hamdi's seizure took place
in a combat zone, the habeas determination can be made purely as a
matter of law, with no further hearing or factfinding necessary. This
argument is easily rejected. As the dissenters from the denial of
rehearing en banc noted, the circumstances surrounding Hamdi's seizure
cannot in any way be characterized as "undisputed," as "those
circumstances are neither conceded in fact, nor susceptible to
concession in law, because Hamdi has not been permitted to speak for
himself or even through counsel as to those circumstances." Further, the
"facts" that constitute the alleged concession are insufficient to
support Hamdi's detention. Under the definition of enemy combatant that
we accept today as falling within the scope of Congress' authorization,
Hamdi would need to be "part of or supporting forces hostile to the
United States or coalition partners" and "engaged in an armed conflict
against the United States" to justify his detention in the United States
for the duration of the relevant conflict. The habeas petition states
only that "\[w\]hen seized by the United States Government, Mr. Hamdi
resided in Afghanistan." An assertion that one resided in a country in
which combat operations are taking place is not a concession that one
was "captured in a zone of active combat operations in a foreign theater
of war," and certainly is not a concession that one was "part of or
supporting forces hostile to the United States or coalition partners"
and "engaged in an armed conflict against the United States."
Accordingly, we reject any argument that Hamdi has made concessions that
eliminate any right to further process.

The Government's second argument requires closer consideration. This is
the argument that further factual exploration is unwarranted and
inappropriate in light of the extraordinary constitutional interests at
stake. Under the Government's most extreme rendition of this argument,
"\[r\]espect for separation of powers and the limited institutional
capabilities of courts in matters of military decision-making in
connection with an ongoing conflict" ought to eliminate entirely any
individual process, restricting the courts to investigating only whether
legal authorization exists for the broader detention scheme. At most,
the Government argues, courts should review its determination that a
citizen is an enemy combatant under a very deferential "some evidence"
standard. Under this review, a court would assume the accuracy of the
Government's articulated basis for Hamdi's detention, as set forth in
the Mobbs Declaration, and assess only whether that articulated basis
was a legitimate one.

In response, Hamdi emphasizes that this Court consistently has
recognized that an individual challenging his detention may not be held
at the will of the Executive without recourse to some proceeding before
a neutral tribunal to determine whether the Executive's asserted
justifications for that detention have basis in fact and warrant in law.
He argues that the Fourth Circuit inappropriately "ceded power to the
Executive during wartime to define the conduct for which a citizen may
be detained, judge whether that citizen has engaged in the proscribed
conduct, and imprison that citizen indefinitely," and that due process
demands that he receive a hearing in which he may challenge the Mobbs
Declaration and adduce his own counter evidence. The District Court,
agreeing with Hamdi, apparently believed that the appropriate process
would approach the process that accompanies a criminal trial. It
therefore disapproved of the hearsay nature of the Mobbs Declaration and
anticipated quite extensive discovery of various military affairs.
Anything less, it concluded, would not be "meaningful judicial review."

Both of these positions highlight legitimate concerns. And both
emphasize the tension that often exists between the autonomy that the
Government asserts is necessary in order to pursue effectively a
particular goal and the process that a citizen contends he is due before
he is deprived of a constitutional right. The ordinary mechanism that we
use for balancing such serious competing interests, and for determining
the procedures that are necessary to ensure that a citizen is not
"deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law," is
the test that we articulated in Mathews v. Eldridge. Mathews dictates
that the process due in any given instance is determined by weighing
"the private interest that will be affected by the official action"
against the Government's asserted interest, "including the function
involved" and the burdens the Government would face in providing greater
process. The Mathews calculus then contemplates a judicious balancing of
these concerns, through an analysis of "the risk of an erroneous
deprivation" of the private interest if the process were reduced and the
"probable value, if any, of additional or substitute safeguards." Ibid.
We take each of these steps in turn.

It is beyond question that substantial interests lie on both sides of
the scale in this case. Hamdi's "private interest ... affected by the
official action," is the most elemental of liberty interests--the
interest in being free from physical detention by one's own government.
"In our society liberty is the norm," and detention without trial "is
the carefully limited exception." "We have always been careful not to
'minimize the importance and fundamental nature' of the individual's
right to liberty," and we will not do so today.

Nor is the weight on this side of the Mathews scale offset by the
circumstances of war or the accusation of treasonous behavior, for
"\[i\]t is clear that commitment for any purpose constitutes a
significant deprivation of liberty that requires due process
protection," and at this stage in the Mathews calculus, we consider the
interest of the erroneously detained individual. Indeed, as amicus
briefs from media and relief organizations emphasize, the risk of
erroneous deprivation of a citizen's liberty in the absence of
sufficient process here is very real. Moreover, as critical as the
Government's interest may be in detaining those who actually pose an
immediate threat to the national security of the United States during
ongoing international conflict, history and common sense teach us that
an unchecked system of detention carries the potential to become a means
for oppression and abuse of others who do not present that sort of
threat. See Ex parte Milligan, 4 Wall., at 125 ("\[The Founders\]
knew--the history of the world told them--the nation they were founding,
be its existence short or long, would be involved in war; how often or
how long continued, human foresight could not tell; and that unlimited
power, wherever lodged at such a time, was especially hazardous to
freemen"). Because we live in a society in which "\[m\]ere public
intolerance or animosity cannot constitutionally justify the deprivation
of a person's physical liberty," our starting point for the Mathews v.
Eldridge analysis is unaltered by the allegations surrounding the
particular detainee or the organizations with which he is alleged to
have associated. We reaffirm today the fundamental nature of a citizen's
right to be free from involuntary confinement by his own government
without due process of law, and we weigh the opposing governmental
interests against the curtailment of liberty that such confinement
entails.

On the other side of the scale are the weighty and sensitive
governmental interests in ensuring that those who have in fact fought
with the enemy during a war do not return to battle against the United
States. As discussed above, the law of war and the realities of combat
may render such detentions both necessary and appropriate, and our due
process analysis need not blink at those realities. Without doubt, our
Constitution recognizes that core strategic matters of warmaking belong
in the hands of those who are best positioned and most politically
accountable for making them.

The Government also argues at some length that its interests in reducing
the process available to alleged enemy combatants are heightened by the
practical difficulties that would accompany a system of trial-like
process. In its view, military officers who are engaged in the serious
work of waging battle would be unnecessarily and dangerously distracted
by litigation half a world away, and discovery into military operations
would both intrude on the sensitive secrets of national defense and
result in a futile search for evidence buried under the rubble of war.
To the extent that these burdens are triggered by heightened procedures,
they are properly taken into account in our due process analysis.

Striking the proper constitutional balance here is of great importance
to the Nation during this period of ongoing combat. But it is equally
vital that our calculus not give short shrift to the values that this
country holds dear or to the privilege that is American citizenship. It
is during our most challenging and uncertain moments that our Nation's
commitment to due process is most severely tested; and it is in those
times that we must preserve our commitment at home to the principles for
which we fight abroad.

With due recognition of these competing concerns, we believe that
neither the process proposed by the Government nor the process
apparently envisioned by the District Court below strikes the proper
constitutional balance when a United States citizen is detained in the
United States as an enemy combatant. That is, "the risk of erroneous
deprivation" of a detainee's liberty interest is unacceptably high under
the Government's proposed rule, while some of the "additional or
substitute procedural safeguards" suggested by the District Court are
unwarranted in light of their limited "probable value" and the burdens
they may impose on the military in such cases.

We therefore hold that a citizen-detainee seeking to challenge his
classification as an enemy combatant must receive notice of the factual
basis for his classification, and a fair opportunity to rebut the
Government's factual assertions before a neutral decisionmaker. These
essential constitutional promises may not be eroded.

At the same time, the exigencies of the circumstances may demand that,
aside from these core elements, enemy combatant proceedings may be
tailored to alleviate their uncommon potential to burden the Executive
at a time of ongoing military conflict. Hearsay, for example, may need
to be accepted as the most reliable available evidence from the
Government in such a proceeding. Likewise, the Constitution would not be
offended by a presumption in favor of the Government's evidence, so long
as that presumption remained a rebuttable one and fair opportunity for
rebuttal were provided. Thus, once the Government puts forth credible
evidence that the habeas petitioner meets the enemy-combatant criteria,
the onus could shift to the petitioner to rebut that evidence with more
persuasive evidence that he falls outside the criteria.

A burden-shifting scheme of this sort would meet the goal of ensuring
that the errant tourist, embedded journalist, or local aid worker has a
chance to prove military error while giving due regard to the Executive
once it has put forth meaningful support for its conclusion that the
detainee is in fact an enemy combatant. In the words of Mathews, process
of this sort would sufficiently address the "risk of erroneous
deprivation" of a detainee's liberty interest while eliminating certain
procedures that have questionable additional value in light of the
burden on the Government.

We think it unlikely that this basic process will have the dire impact
on the central functions of warmaking that the Government forecasts. The
parties agree that initial captures on the battlefield need not receive
the process we have discussed here; that process is due only when the
determination is made to continue to hold those who have been seized.
The Government has made clear in its briefing that documentation
regarding battlefield detainees already is kept in the ordinary course
of military affairs. Any factfinding imposition created by requiring a
knowledgeable affiant to summarize these records to an independent
tribunal is a minimal one. Likewise, arguments that military officers
ought not have to wage war under the threat of litigation lose much of
their steam when factual disputes at enemy-combatant hearings are
limited to the alleged combatant's acts. This focus meddles little, if
at all, in the strategy or conduct of war, inquiring only into the
appropriateness of continuing to detain an individual claimed to have
taken up arms against the United States. While we accord the greatest
respect and consideration to the judgments of military authorities in
matters relating to the actual prosecution of a war, and recognize that
the scope of that discretion necessarily is wide, it does not infringe
on the core role of the military for the courts to exercise their own
time-honored and constitutionally mandated roles of reviewing and
resolving claims like those presented here.

In sum, while the full protections that accompany challenges to
detentions in other settings may prove unworkable and inappropriate in
the enemy-combatant setting, the threats to military operations posed by
a basic system of independent review are not so weighty as to trump a
citizen's core rights to challenge meaningfully the Government's case
and to be heard by an impartial adjudicator.

In so holding, we necessarily reject the Government's assertion that
separation of powers principles mandate a heavily circumscribed role for
the courts in such circumstances. Indeed, the position that the courts
must forgo any examination of the individual case and focus exclusively
on the legality of the broader detention scheme cannot be mandated by
any reasonable view of separation of powers, as this approach serves
only to condense power into a single branch of government. We have long
since made clear that a state of war is not a blank check for the
President when it comes to the rights of the Nation's citizens. Whatever
power the United States Constitution envisions for the Executive in its
exchanges with other nations or with enemy organizations in times of
conflict, it most assuredly envisions a role for all three branches when
individual liberties are at stake. Likewise, we have made clear that,
unless Congress acts to suspend it, the Great Writ of habeas corpus
allows the Judicial Branch to play a necessary role in maintaining this
delicate balance of governance, serving as an important judicial check
on the Executive's discretion in the realm of detentions. Thus, while we
do not question that our due process assessment must pay keen attention
to the particular burdens faced by the Executive in the context of
military action, it would turn our system of checks and balances on its
head to suggest that a citizen could not make his way to court with a
challenge to the factual basis for his detention by his government,
simply because the Executive opposes making available such a challenge.
Absent suspension of the writ by Congress, a citizen detained as an
enemy combatant is entitled to this process.

Because we conclude that due process demands some system for a citizen
detainee to refute his classification, the proposed "some evidence"
standard is inadequate. Any process in which the Executive's factual
assertions go wholly unchallenged or are simply presumed correct without
any opportunity for the alleged combatant to demonstrate otherwise falls
constitutionally short. As the Government itself has recognized, we have
utilized the "some evidence" standard in the past as a standard of
review, not as a standard of proof. That is, it primarily has been
employed by courts in examining an administrative record developed after
an adversarial proceeding--one with process at least of the sort that we
today hold is constitutionally mandated in the citizen enemy-combatant
setting. This standard therefore is ill suited to the situation in which
a habeas petitioner has received no prior proceedings before any
tribunal and had no prior opportunity to rebut the Executive's factual
assertions before a neutral decisionmaker.

\[\* \* \*\]

There remains the possibility that the standards we have articulated
could be met by an appropriately authorized and properly constituted
military tribunal. Indeed, it is notable that military regulations
already provide for such process in related instances, dictating that
tribunals be made available to determine the status of enemy detainees
who assert prisoner-of-war status under the Geneva Convention. In the
absence of such process, however, a court that receives a petition for a
writ of habeas corpus from an alleged enemy combatant must itself ensure
that the minimum requirements of due process are achieved. Both courts
below recognized as much, focusing their energies on the question of
whether Hamdi was due an opportunity to rebut the Government's case
against him. The Government, too, proceeded on this assumption,
presenting its affidavit and then seeking that it be evaluated under a
deferential standard of review based on burdens that it alleged would
accompany any greater process. As we have discussed, a habeas court in a
case such as this may accept affidavit evidence like that contained in
the Mobbs Declaration, so long as it also permits the alleged combatant
to present his own factual case to rebut the Government's return. We
anticipate that a District Court would proceed with the caution that we
have indicated is necessary in this setting, engaging in a factfinding
process that is both prudent and incremental. We have no reason to doubt
that courts faced with these sensitive matters will pay proper heed both
to the matters of national security that might arise in an individual
case and to the constitutional limitations safeguarding essential
liberties that remain vibrant even in times of security concerns.

**Notes on Hamdi**

1\. The dissenting opinions in this case are of particular interest, and
are also worth a read to those students interested in the different ways
in which the balance between individual liberty and national security
may be struck in a time of war.

2\. In *Boumediene v. Bush*, 553 U.S. 723 (2008), the Court revisited
the *habeas* issue, finding that a Congressional jurisdiction-stripping
act covering Guantanamo detainees was an unconstitutional suspension of
the writ, in part because military commission procedural protections
were an "inadequate substitute" for the writ. Those interested in the
interactions of *habeas* and due process are advised to review this
case.

### National Council of Resistance of Iran v. Department of State, 251 F.3d 192 (D.C. Cir., 2001)

Sentelle, Circuit Judge:

Two organizations, the National Council of Resistance of Iran and the
People\'s Mojahedin of Iran, petition for review of the Secretary\'s
designation of the two as constituting a \"foreign terrorist
organization\" under the Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act
of 1996, raising both statutory and constitutional arguments. While we
determine that the designation was in compliance with the statute, we
further determine that the designation does violate the due process
rights of the petitioners under the Fifth Amendment, and we therefore
remand the case for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.

The Statute

Under the Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996
(\"Anti-Terrorism Act\" or \"AEDPA\"), 8 U.S.C. 1189, the Secretary of
State is empowered to designate an entity as a \"foreign terrorist
organization.\" The consequences of that designation are dire. The
designation by the Secretary results in blocking any funds which the
organization has on deposit with any financial institution in the United
States. Representatives and certain members of the organization are
barred from entry into the United States. Perhaps most importantly, all
persons within or subject to jurisdiction of the United States are
forbidden from \"knowingly providing material support or resources\" to
the organization.

Despite the seriousness of the consequences of the determination, the
administrative process by which the Secretary makes it is a truncated
one. In part, the AEDPA imposes the Secretary\'s duties in \"APA-like
language.\" The Secretary compiles an \"administrative record\" and
based upon that record makes \"findings.\" If the Secretary makes the
critical findings that \"an entity is a foreign organization engaging in
terrorist activities that threaten the national security of the United
States,\" that entity then suffers the consequences listed above.

Following the administrative designation there is judicial review. While
that statutory procedure, so far as it goes, sounds like the familiar
procedure normally employed by the Congress to afford due process in
administrative proceedings, the similarity to process afforded in other
administrative proceedings ends there. As we have observed before, this
\"statute \... is unique, procedurally and substantively.\" The unique
feature of this statutory procedure is the dearth of procedural
participation and protection afforded the designated entity. At no point
in the proceedings establishing the administrative record is the alleged
terrorist organization afforded notice of the materials used against it,
or a right to comment on such materials or the developing administrative
record. Nothing in the statute forbids the use of \"third hand accounts,
press stories, material on the Internet or other hearsay regarding the
organization\'s activities\....\" The Secretary may base the findings on
classified material, to which the organization has no access at any
point during or after the proceeding to designate it as terrorist.

The entity may obtain judicial review by application to this court not
later than thirty days after the publication of the designation in the
Federal Register. But that review is quite limited. Review is based
solely upon the administrative record. Granted this is not in itself an
unusual limitation, but one common to many administrative reviews.
However, under the AEDPA the aggrieved party has had no opportunity to
either add to or comment on the contents of that administrative record;
and the record can, and in our experience generally does, encompass
\"classified information used in making the designation,\" as to which
the alleged terrorist organization never has any access, and which the
statute expressly provides the government may submit to the court ex
parte and in camera.

The scope of judicial review is limited as well. We are to hold unlawful
and set aside designations that we find to be

\(A\) arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion or otherwise not in
accordance with law;

\(B\) contrary to constitutional right, power, privilege, or immunity;

\(C\) in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitation, or
short of statutory right;

\(D\) lacking substantial support in the administrative record taken as
a whole or in classified information submitted to the court under
paragraph (2), or

\(E\) not in accord with the procedures required by law.

Again, this limited scope is reminiscent of other administrative review,
but again, it has the unique feature that the affected entity is unable
to access, comment on, or contest the critical material. Thus the entity
does not have the benefit of meaningful adversary proceedings on any of
the statutory grounds, other than procedural shortfalls so obvious a
Secretary of State is not likely to commit them.

In the decisions now under review, we consider two petitions under
1189(b).

The Petitions

By notice of October 8, 1999, the Secretary of State, inter alia,
redesignated petitioner People\'s Mojahedin of Iran (\"PMOI\") as a
foreign terrorist organization). In the 1999 designation, then Secretary
Madeleine Albright for the first time included the designation of the
second petitioner before us, the National Council of Resistance of Iran
(\"NCRI\"). The Secretary found that the NCRI is an alter ego or alias
of the PMOI. Both petitioners argue that the Secretary\'s designation
deprives them of constitutionally protected rights without due process
of law.

\[\*\*\*\]

Both petitioners assert that by designating them without notice or
hearing as a foreign terrorist organization, with the resultant
interference with their rights to obtain and possess property and the
rights of their members to enter the United States, the Secretary
deprived them of \"liberty, or property, without due process of law,\"
in violation of the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution.
We agree. The United States\'s defense against the constitutional claims
of the petitioners is two-fold: (1) that the petitioners have no
protected constitutional rights and (2) that even if they have such
rights, none are violated. Both lines of defense fail.

We consider first the eligibility of the petitioners for constitutional
protection. In resisting the claims of the PMOI to due process
protection, the government asserts that \"nearly all of these arguments
are foreclosed by the binding precedent of this Court in the People\'s
Mojahedin published decision, where this Court rejected those same
arguments.\" In fact, in that decision this court rejected only the
statutory arguments. We did so after concluding that the petitioners in
that case had established no constitutional entitlement because \"a
foreign entity without property or presence in this country has no
constitutional rights, under the Due Process Clause or otherwise.\" We
left the constitutional questions for such time as a designated foreign
terrorist organization might be able to establish its constitutional
presence in the United States.

\[*Omitted: holding that the organizations had established
constitutional presence*\]

The Secretary offers one further argument for the proposition that
petitioners are not entitled to the protection of the Due Process
Clause. The Secretary asserts that the United States exercises the
powers of external sovereignty independent of the affirmative grants of
the Constitution as an inherent attribute of sovereignty under
international law. As a result of that sovereignty, the Secretary
contends, the government interacts with foreign entities not within the
constitutional framework, but through the system of international law
and diplomacy. Specifically, the Secretary asserts that \"foreign
governmental entities therefore \'lie\[ \] outside the structure of the
union.\' This argument need not detain us long.

It is certainly true that sovereign states interact with each other
through diplomacy and even coercion in ways not affected by
constitutional protections such as the Due Process Clause. However,
since neither the PMOI nor the NCRI is a government, none of the
authorities offered by the Secretary have any force.

\[\* \* \*\]

The government argues that even accepting the proposition that
petitioners are entitled to the protection of the Due Process Clause of
the Fifth Amendment, the designation process and its consequences do not
deprive them of life, liberty, or property. The Secretary contends that
this question is settled by Paul v. Davis, 424 U.S. 693 (1976), in which
the Supreme Court held that the government does not, simply by the act
of defaming a person, deprive him of liberty or property rights
protected by the Due Process Clause. However, Paul v. Davis held much
more than the point for which the government asserts it.

That case concerned the stigmatizing of plaintiffs by police officers
distributing a flyer listing them among \"active shoplifters.\" In
reversing a circuit decision that the dissemination of such information
implicated the Due Process Clause, the High Court entered the holding
upon which the government relies. But in doing so, it analyzed and
distinguished its earlier decision in Wisconsin v. Constantineau,. In
Constantineau, a state statute empowered a local police chief, without
notice or hearing to a citizen, to cause a notice to be posted in all
retail outlets that that person was one who \"by excessive drinking\"
exhibited specified undesirable \"traits, such as exposing himself or
family \'to want\' or becoming \'dangerous to the peace\' of the
community.\" The Constantineau Court held that this stigmatizing posting
without notice or hearing constituted a violation of the Fifth Amendment
Due Process Clause. In explaining its refusal to follow Constantineau,
the Paul Court noted specific language from the Constantineau holding:
"Where a person\'s good name, reputation, honor, or integrity is at
stake because of what the government is doing to him, notice and
opportunity to be heard are essential."

The Paul Court then went on to note the effects of the excessive
drinking posting beyond stigmatization: That is, the posted individual
could not purchase or even receive by gift alcoholic beverages within
the city limits for one year. Thus, the Paul Court held, the appropriate
rule of law is that where the government issues a stigmatizing posting
(or designation) as a result of which the stigmatized individual is
\"deprived \... of a right previously held under state law,\" due
process is required. The deprivation under the Wisconsin statute as
described in Paul v. Davis was \"the right to purchase or obtain liquor
in common with the rest of the citizens.\"

Like the parties in Constantineau, and unlike the parties in Paul,
petitioners here have suffered more than mere stigmatization. Rather
than being posted as drunkards, the petitioners have been designated as
foreign terrorist organizations under the AEDPA. Rather than being
deprived of the previously held right to purchase liquor, they have been
deprived of the previously held right to\--for example\--hold bank
accounts, and to receive material support or resources from anyone
within the jurisdiction of the United States. Many people, presumably
including the members of the Council and the PMOI, would consider these
to be rights more important than the right to purchase liquor. We
consider at least one of them equally entitled to constitutional
protection.

The most obvious rights to be impaired by the Secretary\'s designation
are the petitioners\' property rights. Specifically, there is before us
at least a colorable allegation that at least one of the petitioners has
an interest in a bank account in the United States. \[\* \* \*\]

The other two consequences of the designation less clearly implicate
interests protected by the Due Process Clause. As to the right of the
members of the organizations to enter the United States, the Secretary
argues with some convincing force that aliens have no right of entry and
that the organization has no standing to judicially assert rights which
its members could not bring to court. The organizations counter that the
present act limits the ability to travel abroad of its members who are
already in the United States as they know they would be denied
readmission.

As to the third consequence of the designation\--that is the banning of
the provision of material support or resources to the
organizations\--both parties again raise colorable arguments. The
petitioners assert that this limitation deprives their members of First
Amendment associational and expressive rights. The government asserts
that the limitation does not affect the ability of anyone to engage in
advocacy of the goals of the organizations, but only from providing
material support which might likely be employed in the pursuit of
unlawful terrorist purposes as of First Amendment protected advocacy.

On each of the second and third consequences, each side offers plausible
arguments. But we need not decide as an initial matter whether those
consequences invade Fifth Amendment protected rights of liberty, because
the invasion of the Fifth Amendment protected property right in the
first consequence is sufficient to entitle petitioners to the due
process of law.

When process is due.

As petitioners argue, the fundamental norm of due process clause
jurisprudence requires that before the government can constitutionally
deprive a person of the protected liberty or property interest, it must
afford him notice and hearing. Therefore, petitioners argue that the
Secretary was obligated to give them notice of her intent to make the
declarations of terrorist status and previous nature, and afford them
the opportunity to respond to the evidence upon which she proposed to
make those declarations and to be heard on the proper resolution of the
questions. Indeed, \"\[the Supreme\] Court consistently has held that
some form of hearing is required before an individual is finally
deprived of a property interest.\"

At the same time, the Supreme Court has made clear that \"\[i\]t is by
now well established that \' \"due process\" unlike some legal rules, is
not a technical conception with a fixed content unrelated to time, place
and circumstances.\' \" Otherwise put, \"due process is flexible and
calls for such procedural protections as the particular situation
demands.\" Citing Homar, and Morrissey, inter alia, the United States
contends that since due process consists only of that process which is
due under the circumstances, even given our holding that petitioners are
protected by the due process clause, they are not due any procedural
protection that they have not already received.

\[\* \* \*\] The government rightly reminds us that the Supreme Court
established in Mathews v. Eldridge and indeed even before that decision,
that identification of the specific dictates of due process generally
requires consideration of three distinct factors: first, the private
interests that will be affected by the official action; second, the risk
of an erroneous deprivation of such interest of the procedure used, and
the probable value, if any, of additional or substitute procedural
safeguards; and finally, the government\'s interest, including the
function involved and the fiscal and administrative burdens that the
additional or substitute procedural requirements would entail.

Unlike the advocates before us, we do not have the luxury of blurring
the question of what and when. We must determine what process is
sufficient to afford petitioners the protection of the Fifth Amendment,
and when\--in terms of pre-deprivation or post-deprivation\--that
process must be available.

As to the private interest, the government compares the interests
asserted by petitioners in this case with that asserted in United States
v. James Daniel Good Real Property. In that case, the Supreme Court
considered \"whether, in the absence of exigent circumstances, the Due
Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment prohibits the government in a
civil forfeiture case from seizing real property without first affording
the owner notice and an opportunity to be heard.\" The Court expressly
held \"that it does.\" The government argues from the facts of James
Daniel Good Real Property that the importance of the real estate
forfeited in that case dwarfs the importance of the interests of an
organization in, for example, a bank account, and concludes that somehow
that case supports the proposition that the interest to be protected
here is not sufficiently important to warrant due process.

This strikes us as a non sequitur. The fact that the Supreme Court has
held that the Fifth Amendment provides protection for a highly important
property interest is at most neutral on the question of whether that
Amendment provides protection to an arguably less important property
interest, or even a concededly less important one. If anything, the
decision would seem to weigh in favor of affording due process
protection to the interest asserted by petitioners\--it being a property
interest as was the interest before the Supreme Court in James Daniel
Good Real Property.

As to the second factor, that is, the risk of erroneous deprivation, the
Secretary again offers an analysis of questionable relevance. The
government reminds us that the Secretary must, under the statute,
consult with the Attorney General and the Secretary of Treasury before
designating a foreign terrorist organization, and must notify
congressional leaders seven days before designating such an
organization, id. While we understand the Secretary\'s point that more
heads are likely to reach a sounder result, the application of that
facially commonsensical notion to due process questions is, to put it
charitably, unclear. The United States functions with a unitary
executive, created in Article II of the Constitution and constrained by
the Fifth Amendment from depriving anyone protected by that Amendment of
life, liberty or property without due process of law. The involvement of
more than one of the servants of that unitary executive in commencing a
deprivation does not create an apparent substitute for the notice
requirement inherent in the constitutional norm. Neither is it apparent
how notice by the Article II branch of government to representatives of
the Article I branch can substitute for notice to the person deprived.
Again, the government has offered nothing that apparently weighs in
favor of a post-deprivational as opposed to predeprivational compliance
with due process requirements of the Constitution.

As to the third Mathews v. Eldridge factor\--\"the government\'s
interest, including the function involved in the fiscal and
administrative burdens that the additional or substitute procedural
requirement would entail,\"\--the Secretary rightly reminds us that \"no
governmental interest is more compelling than the security of the
nation.\" It is on this very point that the Secretary most clearly has
failed to distinguish between the what of the Due Process Clause and the
when. Certainly the United States enjoys a privilege in classified
information affecting national security so strong that even a criminal
defendant to whose defense such information is relevant cannot pierce
that privilege absent a specific showing of materiality. As we will
discuss further infra, that strong interest of the government clearly
affects the nature\--the \"what\" of the due process which must be
afforded petitioners. It is not immediately apparent how that affects
the \"when\" of the process\--that is, whether due process may be
effectively provided post-deprivation as opposed to pre-deprivation.

In support of the argument that the foreign-policy/nationalsecurity
nature of the evidence supports the constitutional adequacy of a
post-deprivation remedy, the Secretary offers our decision in Palestine
Information Office v. Shultz. The Secretary is correct that in that
case, we held that where the Secretary of State had ordered the closing
of an office (arguably, a foreign ministry) in this country in response
to and in an attempt to curb alleged terrorist activities, the \"burden
on the government of requiring a hearing before the closing of \[the\]
foreign mission\" was sufficient to warrant dispensing with any
otherwise available pre-deprivation hearing. We did so recognizing the
\" \'changeable and explosive nature of contemporary international
relations, and the fact that the executive is immediately privy to
information which cannot be swiftly presented to, evaluated by, and
acted upon by the legislature\....\' \"

We remain committed to, and indeed bound by, that same reasoning. It is
simply not the case, however, that the Secretary has shown how affording
the organizations whatever due process they are due before their
designation as foreign terrorist organizations and the resulting
deprivation of right would interfere with the Secretary\'s duty to carry
out foreign policy.

To oversimplify, assume the Secretary gives notice to one of the
entities that:

"We are considering designating you as a foreign terrorist organization,
and in addition to classified information, we will be using the
following summarized administrative record. You have the right to come
forward with any other evidence you may have that you are not a foreign
terrorist organization."

It is not immediately apparent how the foreign policy goals of the
government in general and the Secretary in particular would be
inherently impaired by that notice. It is particularly difficult to
discern how such a notice could interfere with the Secretary\'s
legitimate goals were it presented to an entity such as the PMOI
concerning its redesignation. We recognize, as we have recognized
before, that items of classified information which do not appear
dangerous or perhaps even important to judges might \"make all too much
sense to a foreign counterintelligence specialist who could learn much
about this nation\'s intelligence-gathering capabilities from what these
documents revealed about sources and methods.\" We extend that
recognition to the possibility that alerting a previously undesignated
organization to the impending designation as a foreign terrorist
organization might work harm to this county\'s foreign policy goals in
ways that the court would not immediately perceive. We therefore wish to
make plain that we do not foreclose the possibility of the Secretary, in
an appropriate case, demonstrating the necessity of withholding all
notice and all opportunity to present evidence until the designation is
already made. The difficulty with that in the present case is that the
Secretary has made no attempt at such a showing.

We therefore hold that the Secretary must afford the limited due process
available to the putative foreign terrorist organization prior to the
deprivation worked by designating that entity as such with its attendant
consequences, unless he can make a showing of particularized need.

What process is due

We have no doubt foreshadowed our conclusion as to what process the
Secretary must afford by our discussion of when the Secretary must
afford it. That is, consistent with the full history of due process
jurisprudence, as reflected in Mathews v. Eldridge, \"\[t\]he
fundamental requirement of due process is the opportunity to be heard
\'at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner.\' To make plain what
we have assumed above, those procedures which have been held to satisfy
the Due Process Clause have \"included notice of the action sought,\"
along with the opportunity to effectively be heard. This, we hold, is
what the Constitution requires of the Secretary in designating
organizations as foreign terrorist organizations under the statute. The
Secretary must afford to the entities under consideration notice that
the designation is impending. Upon an adequate showing to the court, the
Secretary may provide this notice after the designation where earlier
notification would impinge upon the security and other foreign policy
goals of the United States.

The notice must include the action sought, but need not disclose the
classified information to be presented in camera and ex parte to the
court under the statute. This is within the privilege and prerogative of
the executive, and we do not intend to compel a breach in the security
which that branch is charged to protect. However, the Secretary has
shown no reason not to offer the designated entities notice of the
administrative record which will in any event be filed publicly, at the
very latest at the time of the court\'s review. We therefore require
that as soon as the Secretary has reached a tentative determination that
the designation is impending, the Secretary must provide notice of those
unclassified items upon which he proposes to rely to the entity to be
designated. There must then be some compliance with the hearing
requirement of due process jurisprudence\--that is, the opportunity to
be heard at a meaningful time and in a meaningful manner recognized in
Mathews, Armstrong, and a plethora of other cases. We do not suggest
\"that a hearing closely approximating a judicial trial is necessary.\"
We do, however, require that the Secretary afford to entities considered
for imminent designation the opportunity to present, at least in written
form, such evidence as those entities may be able to produce to rebut
the administrative record or otherwise negate the proposition that they
are foreign terrorist organizations.

It is for this reason that even in those instances when postdeprivation
due process is sufficient, our review under 1189(b) is not sufficient to
supply the otherwise absent due process protection. The statutory
judicial review is limited to the adequacy of the record before the
court to support the Secretary\'s executive decision. That record is
currently compiled by the Secretary without notice or opportunity for
any meaningful hearing. We have no reason to presume that the
petitioners in this particular case could have offered evidence which
might have either changed the Secretary\'s mind or affected the adequacy
of the record. However, without the due process protections which we
have outlined, we cannot presume the contrary either.

Remedy

We recognize that a strict and immediate application of the principles
of law which we have set forth herein could be taken to require a
revocation of the designations before us. However, we also recognize the
realities of the foreign policy and national security concerns asserted
by the Secretary in support of those designations. We further recognize
the timeline against which all are operating: the two-year designations
before us expire in October of this year. We therefore do not order the
vacation of the existing designations, but rather remand the questions
to the Secretary with instructions that the petitioners be afforded the
opportunity to file responses to the nonclassified evidence against
them, to file evidence in support of their allegations that they are not
terrorist organizations, and that they be afforded an opportunity to be
meaningfully heard by the Secretary upon the relevant findings.

**Note on the National Security Cases**

The State Secrets Privilege. Post-deprivation remedies in the national
security context may be hampered by continued inability of private
citizens to access classified information pertaining to their treatment.
Post-deprivation civil suits may be dismissed entirely to the extent
they risk the revealing of classified information, under the "state
secrets privilege." For a recent example, *see* *Khaled el-Masri v.
United States*, 479 F.3d 296 (4^th^ Cir. 2006) (dismissing suit brought
by alleged victim of "extraordinary rendition" program on grounds of
state secrets privilege). Is this consistent with procedural due
process?

Public Employment
-----------------

### Board of Regents v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564 (1972)

MR. JUSTICE STEWART delivered the opinion of the Court.

In 1968, the respondent, David Roth, was hired for his first teaching
job as assistant professor of political science at Wisconsin State
University-Oshkosh. He was hired for a fixed term of one academic year.
The notice of his faculty appointment specified that his employment
would begin on September 1, 1968, and would end on June 30, 1969. The
respondent completed that term. But he was informed that he would not be
rehired for the next academic year.

The respondent had no tenure rights to continued employment. Under
Wisconsin statutory law, a state university teacher can acquire tenure
as a \"permanent\" employee only after four years of year-to-year
employment. Having acquired tenure, a teacher is entitled to continued
employment \"during efficiency and good behavior.\" A relatively new
teacher without tenure, however, is, under Wisconsin law, entitled to
nothing beyond his one-year appointment. There are no statutory or
administrative standards defining eligibility for reemployment. State
law thus clearly leaves the decision whether to rehire a nontenured
teacher for another year to the unfettered discretion of university
officials.

The procedural protection afforded a Wisconsin State University teacher
before he is separated from the University corresponds to his job
security. As a matter of statutory law, a tenured teacher cannot be
\"discharged except for cause upon written charges\" and pursuant to
certain procedures. A nontenured teacher, similarly, is protected to
some extent *during* his one-year term. Rules promulgated by the Board
of Regents provide that a nontenured teacher \"dismissed\" before the
end of the year may have some opportunity for review of the
\"dismissal.\" But the Rules provide no real protection for a nontenured
teacher who simply is not reemployed for the next year. He must be
informed by February 1 \"concerning retention or nonretention for the
ensuing year.\" But \"no reason for non-retention need be given. No
review or appeal is provided in such case.\"

In conformance with these Rules, the President of Wisconsin State
University-Oshkosh informed the respondent before February 1, 1969, that
he would not be rehired for the 1969-1970 academic year. He gave the
respondent no reason for the decision and no opportunity to challenge it
at any sort of hearing.

The respondent then brought this action in Federal District Court
alleging that the decision not to rehire him for the next year infringed
his Fourteenth Amendment rights.

\[\* \* \*\]

The requirements of procedural due process apply only to the deprivation
of interests encompassed by the Fourteenth Amendment's protection of
liberty and property. When protected interests are implicated, the right
to some kind of prior hearing is paramount. But the range of interests
protected by procedural due process is not infinite.

\[\* \* \*\] But, to determine whether due process requirements apply in
the first place, we must look not to the \"weight,\" but to the nature,
of the interest at stake. We must look to see if the interest is within
the Fourteenth Amendment's protection of liberty and property.

\[\* \* \*\] \[T\]he Court has fully and finally rejected the wooden
distinction between \"rights\" and \"privileges\" that once seemed to
govern the applicability of procedural due process rights. The Court has
also made clear that the property interests protected by procedural due
process extend well beyond actual ownership of real estate, chattels, or
money. By the same token, the Court has required due process protection
for deprivations of liberty beyond the sort of formal constraints
imposed by the criminal process.

Yet, while the Court has eschewed rigid or formalistic limitations on
the protection of procedural due process, it has at the same time
observed certain boundaries. For the words \"liberty\" and \"property\"
in the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment must be given some
meaning. "While this Court has not attempted to define with exactness
the liberty . . . guaranteed \[by the Fourteenth Amendment\], the term
has received much consideration and some of the included things have
been definitely stated. Without doubt, it denotes not merely freedom
from bodily restraint, but also the right of the individual to contract,
to engage in any of the common occupations of life, to acquire useful
knowledge, to marry, establish a home and bring up children, to worship
God according to the dictates of his own conscience, and generally to
enjoy those privileges long recognized . . . as essential to the orderly
pursuit of happiness by free men." *Meyer v. Nebraska.*

There might be cases in which a State refused to reemploy a person under
such circumstances that interests in liberty would be implicated. But
this is not such a case.

The State, in declining to rehire the respondent, did not make any
charge against him that might seriously damage his standing and
associations in his community. It did not base the nonrenewal of his
contract on a charge, for example, that he had been guilty of
dishonesty, or immorality. Had it done so, this would be a different
case. For \[w\]here a person\'s good name, reputation, honor, or
integrity is at stake because of what the government is doing to him,
notice and an opportunity to be heard are essential." *Wisconsin v.
Constantineau*. In such a case, due process would accord an opportunity
to refute the charge before University officials. In the present case,
however, there is no suggestion whatever that the respondent\'s \"good
name, reputation, honor, or integrity\" is at stake.

Similarly, there is no suggestion that the State, in declining to
reemploy the respondent, imposed on him a stigma or other disability
that foreclosed his freedom to take advantage of other employment
opportunities. The State, for example, did not invoke any regulations to
bar the respondent from all other public employment in state
universities. Had it done so, this, again, would be a different case.

\[\* \* \*\]

Hence, on the record before us, all that clearly appears is that the
respondent was not rehired for one year at one university. It stretches
the concept too far to suggest that a person is deprived of \"liberty\"
when he simply is not rehired in one job, but remains as free as before
to seek another.

The Fourteenth Amendment's procedural protection of property is a
safeguard of the security of interests that a person has already
acquired in specific benefits. These interests \-- property interests
\-- may take many forms.

Thus, the Court has held that a person receiving welfare benefits under
statutory and administrative standards defining eligibility for them has
an interest in continued receipt of those benefits that is safeguarded
by procedural due process. Similarly, in the area of public employment,
the Court has held that a public college professor dismissed from an
office held under tenure provisions, and college professors and staff
members dismissed during the terms of their contracts, have interests in
continued employment that are safeguarded by due process. Only last
year, the Court held that this principle \"proscribing summary dismissal
from public employment without hearing or inquiry required by due
process\" also applied to a teacher recently hired without tenure or a
formal contract, but nonetheless with a clearly implied promise of
continued employment.

Certain attributes of \"property\" interests protected by procedural due
process emerge from these decisions. To have a property interest in a
benefit, a person clearly must have more than an abstract need or desire
for it. He must have more than a unilateral expectation of it. He must,
instead, have a legitimate claim of entitlement to it. It is a purpose
of the ancient institution of property to protect those claims upon
which people rely in their daily lives, reliance that must not be
arbitrarily undermined. It is a purpose of the constitutional right to a
hearing to provide an opportunity for a person to vindicate those
claims.

Property interests, of course, are not created by the Constitution.
Rather, they are created and their dimensions are defined by existing
rules or understandings that stem from an independent source such as
state law \-- rules or understandings that secure certain benefits and
that support claims of entitlement to those benefits. Thus, the welfare
recipients in *Goldberg v. Kelly* had a claim of entitlement to welfare
payments that was grounded in the statute defining eligibility for them.
The recipients had not yet shown that they were, in fact, within the
statutory terms of eligibility. But we held that they had a right to a
hearing at which they might attempt to do so.

Just as the welfare recipients\' \"property\" interest in welfare
payments was created and defined by statutory terms, so the
respondent\'s \"property\" interest in employment at Wisconsin State
University-Oshkosh was created and defined by the terms of his
appointment. Those terms secured his interest in employment up to June
30, 1969. But the important fact in this case is that they specifically
provided that the respondent\'s employment was to terminate on June 30.
They did not provide for contract renewal absent \"sufficient cause.\"
Indeed, they made no provision for renewal whatsoever.

Thus, the terms of the respondent\'s appointment secured absolutely no
interest in reemployment for the next year. They supported absolutely no
possible claim of entitlement to reemployment. Nor, significantly, was
there any state statute or University rule or policy that secured his
interest in reemployment or that created any legitimate claim to it. In
these circumstances, the respondent surely had an abstract concern in
being rehired, but he did not have a property interest sufficient to
require the University authorities to give him a hearing when they
declined to renew his contract of employment.

### Cleveland Board of Education v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532 (1985)

Justice WHITE delivered the opinion of the Court.

In these cases we consider what pretermination process must be accorded
a public employee who can be discharged only for cause.

\* In 1979 the Cleveland Board of Education, petitioner in No. 83-1362,
hired respondent James Loudermill as a security guard. On his job
application, Loudermill stated that he had never been convicted of a
felony. Eleven months later, as part of a routine examination of his
employment records, the Board discovered that in fact Loudermill had
been convicted of grand larceny in 1968. By letter dated November 3,
1980, the Board\'s Business Manager informed Loudermill that he had been
dismissed because of his dishonesty in filling out the employment
application. Loudermill was not afforded an opportunity to respond to
the charge of dishonesty or to challenge his dismissal. On November 13,
the Board adopted a resolution officially approving the discharge.

Under Ohio law, Loudermill was a \"classified civil servant.\" Such
employees can be terminated only for cause, and may obtain
administrative review if discharged. Pursuant to this provision,
Loudermill filed an appeal with the Cleveland Civil Service Commission
on November 12. The Commission appointed a referee, who held a hearing
on January 29, 1981. Loudermill argued that he had thought that his 1968
larceny conviction was for a misdemeanor rather than a felony. The
referee recommended reinstatement. On July 20, 1981, the full Commission
heard argument and orally announced that it would uphold the dismissal.
Proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law followed on August 10,
and Loudermill\'s attorneys were advised of the result by mail on August
21.

Although the Commission\'s decision was subject to judicial review in
the state courts, Loudermill instead brought the present suit in the
Federal District Court for the Northern District of Ohio. The complaint
alleged that § 124.34 was unconstitutional on its face because it did
not provide the employee an opportunity to respond to the charges
against him prior to removal. As a result, discharged employees were
deprived of liberty and property without due process. The complaint also
alleged that the provision was unconstitutional as applied because
discharged employees were not given sufficiently prompt postremoval
hearings.

\[\* \* \*\]

Respondents\' federal constitutional claim depends on their having had a
property right in continued employment. If they did, the State could not
deprive them of this property without due process.

Property interests are not created by the Constitution, \"they are
created and their dimensions are defined by existing rules or
understandings that stem from an independent source such as state law. .
. .\" Board of Regents v. Roth. The Ohio statute plainly creates such an
interest. Respondents were \"classified civil service employees,\"
entitled to retain their positions \"during good behavior and efficient
service,\" who could not be dismissed \"except . . . for . . .
misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office,\" § 124.34. 4 The
statute plainly supports the conclusion, reached by both lower courts,
that respondents possessed property rights in continued employment.
Indeed, this question does not seem to have been disputed below.

The Parma Board argues, however, that the property right is defined by,
and conditioned on, the legislature\'s choice of procedures for its
deprivation. The Board stresses that in addition to specifying the
grounds for termination, the statute sets out procedures by which
termination may take place. The procedures were adhered to in these
cases. According to petitioner, \"to require additional procedures would
in effect expand the scope of the property interest itself.\"

This argument, which was accepted by the District Court, has its genesis
in the plurality opinion in Arnett v. Kennedy, 416 U.S. 134 (1974).
Arnett involved a challenge by a former federal employee to the
procedures by which he was dismissed. The plurality reasoned that where
the legislation conferring the substantive right also sets out the
procedural mechanism for enforcing that right, the two cannot be
separated:

\"The employee\'s statutorily defined right is not a guarantee against
removal without cause in the abstract, but such a guarantee as enforced
by the procedures which Congress has designated for the determination of
cause ... Where the grant of a substantive right is inextricably
intertwined with the limitations on the procedures which are to be
employed in determining that right, a litigant in the position of
appellee must take the bitter with the sweet.\"

This view garnered three votes in Arnett, but was specifically rejected
by the other six Justices. Since then, this theory has at times seemed
to gather some additional support. More recently, however, the Court has
clearly rejected it. In Vitek v. Jones, we pointed out that \"minimum
procedural requirements are a matter of federal law, they are not
diminished by the fact that the State may have specified its own
procedures that it may deem adequate for determining the preconditions
to adverse official action.\" This conclusion was reiterated in Logan v.
Zimmerman Brush Co., 455 U.S. 422 (1982), where we reversed the lower
court\'s holding that because the entitlement arose from a state
statute, the legislature had the prerogative to define the procedures to
be followed to protect that entitlement.

In light of these holdings, it is settled that the \"bitter with the
sweet\" approach misconceives the constitutional guarantee. If a clearer
holding is needed, we provide it today. The point is straightforward:
the Due Process Clause provides that certain substantive rights---life,
liberty, and property---cannot be deprived except pursuant to
constitutionally adequate procedures. The categories of substance and
procedure are distinct. Were the rule otherwise, the Clause would be
reduced to a mere tautology. \"Property\" cannot be defined by the
procedures provided for its deprivation any more than can life or
liberty. The right to due process \"is conferred, not by legislative
grace, but by constitutional guarantee. While the legislature may elect
not to confer a property interest in public employment, it may not
constitutionally authorize the deprivation of such an interest, once
conferred, without appropriate procedural safeguards.\"

In short, once it is determined that the Due Process Clause applies,
\"the question remains what process is due.\" The answer to that
question is not to be found in the Ohio statute.

An essential principle of due process is that a deprivation of life,
liberty, or property \"be preceded by notice and opportunity for hearing
appropriate to the nature of the case.\" We have described \"the root
requirement\" of the Due Process Clause as being \"that an individual be
given an opportunity for a hearing before he is deprived of any
significant property interest.\" This principle requires \"some kind of
a hearing\" prior to the discharge of an employee who has a
constitutionally protected property interest in his employment. \[\* \*
\*\]

The need for some form of pretermination hearing, recognized in these
cases, is evident from a balancing of the competing interests at stake.
These are the private interests in retaining employment, the
governmental interest in the expeditious removal of unsatisfactory
employees and the avoidance of administrative burdens, and the risk of
an erroneous termination.

First, the significance of the private interest in retaining employment
cannot be gainsaid. We have frequently recognized the severity of
depriving a person of the means of livelihood. While a fired worker may
find employment elsewhere, doing so will take some time and is likely to
be burdened by the questionable circumstances under which he left his
previous job.

Second, some opportunity for the employee to present his side of the
case is recurringly of obvious value in reaching an accurate decision.
Dismissals for cause will often involve factual disputes. Even where the
facts are clear, the appropriateness or necessity of the discharge may
not be; in such cases, the only meaningful opportunity to invoke the
discretion of the decisionmaker is likely to be before the termination
takes effect.

\[\* \* \*\]

The governmental interest in immediate termination does not outweigh
these interests. As we shall explain, affording the employee an
opportunity to respond prior to termination would impose neither a
significant administrative burden nor intolerable delays. Furthermore,
the employer shares the employee\'s interest in avoiding disruption and
erroneous decisions; and until the matter is settled, the employer would
continue to receive the benefit of the employee\'s labors. It is
preferable to keep a qualified employee on than to train a new one. A
governmental employer also has an interest in keeping citizens usefully
employed rather than taking the possibly erroneous and counterproductive
step of forcing its employees onto the welfare rolls. Finally, in those
situations where the employer perceives a significant hazard in keeping
the employee on the job, it can avoid the problem by suspending with
pay.

The foregoing considerations indicate that the pretermination
\"hearing,\" though necessary, need not be elaborate. We have pointed
out that \"the formality and procedural requisites for the hearing can
vary, depending upon the importance of the interests involved and the
nature of the subsequent proceedings.\" In general, \"something less\"
than a full evidentiary hearing is sufficient prior to adverse
administrative action. Under state law, respondents were later entitled
to a full administrative hearing and judicial review. The only question
is what steps were required before the termination took effect.

In only one case, Goldberg v. Kelly, has the Court required a full
adversarial evidentiary hearing prior to adverse governmental action.
However, as the Goldberg Court itself pointed out, that case presented
significantly different considerations than are present in the context
of public employment. Here, the pretermination hearing need not
definitively resolve the propriety of the discharge. It should be an
initial check against mistaken decisions---essentially, a determination
of whether there are reasonable grounds to believe that the charges
against the employee are true and support the proposed action.

The essential requirements of due process, and all that respondents seek
or the Court of Appeals required, are notice and an opportunity to
respond. The opportunity to present reasons, either in person or in
writing, why proposed action should not be taken is a fundamental due
process requirement. The tenured public employee is entitled to oral or
written notice of the charges against him, an explanation of the
employer\'s evidence, and an opportunity to present his side of the
story. To require more than this prior to termination would intrude to
an unwarranted extent on the government\'s interest in quickly removing
an unsatisfactory employee.

Our holding rests in part on the provisions in Ohio law for a full
post-termination hearing. In his cross-petition Loudermill asserts, as a
separate constitutional violation, that his administrative proceedings
took too long. The Court of Appeals held otherwise, and we agree. The
Due Process Clause requires provision of a hearing \"at a meaningful
time.\" At some point, a delay in the post-termination hearing would
become a constitutional violation. In the present case, however, the
complaint merely recites the course of proceedings and concludes that
the denial of a \"speedy resolution\" violated due process. This reveals
nothing about the delay except that it stemmed in part from the
thoroughness of the procedures. A 9-month adjudication is not, of
course, unconstitutionally lengthy per se. Yet Loudermill offers no
indication that his wait was unreasonably prolonged other than the fact
that it took nine months. The chronology of the proceedings set out in
the complaint, coupled with the assertion that nine months is too long
to wait, does not state a claim of a constitutional deprivation.

We conclude that all the process that is due is provided by a
pretermination opportunity to respond, coupled with posttermination
administrative procedures as provided by the Ohio statute.

Justice REHNQUIST, dissenting.

In Arnett v. Kennedy, six Members of this Court agreed that a public
employee could be dismissed for misconduct without a full hearing prior
to termination. A plurality of Justices agreed that the employee was
entitled to exactly what Congress gave him, and no more. The Chief
Justice, Justice Stewart, and I said:

\"Here appellee did have a statutory expectancy that he not be removed
other than for \'such cause as will promote the efficiency of the
service.\' But the very section of the statute which granted him that
right, a right which had previously existed only by virtue of
administrative regulation, expressly provided also for the procedure by
which \'cause\' was to be determined, and expressly omitted the
procedural guarantees which appellee insists are mandated by the
Constitution. Only by bifurcating the very sentence of the Act of
Congress which conferred upon appellee the right not to be removed save
for cause could it be said that he had an expectancy of that substantive
right without the procedural limitations which Congress attached to it.
In the area of federal regulation of government employees, where in the
absence of statutory limitation the governmental employer has had
virtually uncontrolled latitude in decisions as to hiring and firing,
Cafeteria Workers v. McElroy, we do not believe that a statutory
enactment such as the Lloyd-La Follette Act may be parsed as discretely
as appellee urges. Congress was obviously intent on according a measure
of statutory job security to governmental employees which they had not
previously enjoyed, but was likewise intent on excluding more elaborate
procedural requirements which it felt would make the operation of the
new scheme unnecessarily burdensome in practice. Where the focus of
legislation was thus strongly on the procedural mechanism for enforcing
the substantive right which was simultaneously conferred, we decline to
conclude that the substantive right may be viewed wholly apart from the
procedure provided for its enforcement. The employee\'s statutorily
defined right is not a guarantee against removal without cause in the
abstract, but such a guarantee as enforced by the procedures which
Congress has designated for the determination of cause.\"

In these cases, the relevant Ohio statute provides in its first
paragraph that

> the tenure of every officer or employee in the classified service of
> the state and the counties, civil service townships, cities, city
> health districts, general health districts, and city school districts
> thereof, holding a position under this chapter of the Revised Code,
> shall be during good behavior and efficient service and no such
> officer or employee shall be reduced in pay or position, suspended, or
> removed, except . . . for incompetency, inefficiency, dishonesty,
> drunkenness, immoral conduct, insubordination, discourteous treatment
> of the public, neglect of duty, violation of such sections or the
> rules of the director of administrative services or the commission, or
> any other failure of good behavior, or any other acts of misfeasance,
> malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office.

The very next paragraph of this section of the Ohio Revised Code
provides that in the event of suspension of more than three days or
removal the appointing authority shall furnish the employee with the
stated reasons for his removal. The next paragraph provides that within
10 days following the receipt of such a statement, the employee may
appeal in writing to the State Personnel Board of Review or the
Commission, such appeal shall be heard within 30 days from the time of
its filing, and the Board may affirm, disaffirm, or modify the judgment
of the appointing authority.

Thus in one legislative breath Ohio has conferred upon civil service
employees such as respondents in these cases a limited form of tenure
during good behavior, and prescribed the procedures by which that tenure
may be terminated. Here, as in Arnett, \"the employee\'s statutorily
defined right is not a guarantee against removal without cause in the
abstract, but such a guarantee as enforced by the procedures which the
Ohio Legislature has designated for the determination of cause.\" We
stated in Board of Regents v. Roth:

> Property interests, of course, are not created by the Constitution.
> Rather, they are created and their dimensions are defined by existing
> rules or understandings that stem from an independent source such as
> state law---rules or understandings that secure certain benefits and
> that support claims of entitlement to those benefits.

We ought to recognize the totality of the State\'s definition of the
property right in question, and not merely seize upon one of several
paragraphs in a unitary statute to proclaim that in that paragraph the
State has inexorably conferred upon a civil service employee something
which it is powerless under the United States Constitution to qualify in
the next paragraph of the statute. This practice ignores our duty under
Roth to rely on state law as the source of property interests for
purposes of applying the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
While it does not impose a federal definition of property, the Court
departs from the full breadth of the holding in Roth by its selective
choice from among the sentences the Ohio Legislature chooses to use in
establishing and qualifying a right.

Having concluded by this somewhat tortured reasoning that Ohio has
created a property right in the respondents in these cases, the Court
naturally proceeds to inquire what process is \"due\" before the
respondents may be divested of that right. This customary \"balancing\"
inquiry conducted by the Court in these cases reaches a result that is
quite unobjectionable, but it seems to me that it is devoid of any
principles which will either instruct or endure. The balance is simply
an ad hoc weighing which depends to a great extent upon how the Court
subjectively views the underlying interests at stake.

**Note on Loudermill**

Once again we see the question of the extent to which procedural rights
can be defined with property rights, and the Court decisively answers
"no." But is Justice Rehnquist's argument totally without merit? It does
seem that the Court is engaging in an unguided ad-hoc balancing
procedure to apply the *Matthews* factors; if such a procedure must be
undertaken, do separation of powers considerations suggest that it ought
to be done by the legislature?

Blackslists, Control Orders, Reputational Harm
----------------------------------------------

### 

### Wisconsin v. Constantineau, 400 U.S. 433 (1971)

MR. JUSTICE DOUGLAS delivered the opinion of the Court.

Appellee is an adult resident of Hartford, Wis. She brought suit in a
federal district court in Wisconsin to have a Wisconsin statute declared
unconstitutional. \[\* \* \*\]

The Act provides that designated persons may in writing forbid the sale
or gift of intoxicating liquors to one who, \"by excessive drinking,\"
produces described conditions or exhibits specified traits, such as
exposing himself or family \"to want\" or becoming \"dangerous to the
peace\" of the community.

The chief of police of Hartford, without notice or hearing to appellee,
caused to be posted a notice in all retail liquor outlets in Hartford
that sales or gifts of liquors to appellee were forbidden for one year.
Thereupon, this suit was brought against the chief of police claiming
damages and asking for injunctive relief. The State of Wisconsin
intervened as a defendant on the injunctive phase of the case, and that
was the only issue tried and decided, the three-judge court holding the
Act unconstitutional on its face and enjoining its enforcement. The
court said:

\"In \'posting\' an individual, the particular city official or spouse
is doing more than denying him the ability to purchase alcoholic
beverages within the city limits. In essence, he is giving notice to the
public that he has found the particular individual\'s behavior to fall
within one of the categories enumerated in the statutes. It would be
naive not to recognize that such \'posting\' or characterization of an
individual will expose him to public embarrassment and ridicule, and it
is our opinion that procedural due process requires that, before one
acting pursuant to State statute can make such a quasi-judicial
determination, the individual involved must be given notice of the
intent to post and an opportunity to present his side of the matter.\"

We have no doubt as to the power of a State to deal with the evils
described in the Act. The police power of the States over intoxicating
liquors was extremely broad even prior to the Twenty-first Amendment.
The only issue present here is whether the label or characterization
given a person by \"posting,\" though a mark of serious illness to some,
is to others such a stigma or badge of disgrace that procedural due
process requires notice and an opportunity to be heard. We agree with
the District Court that the private interest is such that those
requirements of procedural due process must be met.

It is significant that most of the provisions of the Bill of Rights are
procedural, for it is procedure that marks much of the difference
between rule by law and rule by fiat. We reviewed in Cafeteria Workers
v. McElroy the nature of the various \"private interest\[s\]\" that have
fallen on one side or the other of the line. Generalizations are
hazardous, as some state and federal administrative procedures are
summary by reason of necessity or history. Yet certainly where the State
attaches \"a badge of infamy\" to the citizen, due process comes into
play. Wieman v. Updegraff. \[\* \* \*\]

Where a person\'s good name, reputation, honor, or integrity is at stake
because of what the government is doing to him, notice and an
opportunity to be heard are essential. \"Posting\" under the Wisconsin
Act may to some be merely the mark of illness; to others it is a stigma,
an official branding of a person. The label is a degrading one. Under
the Wisconsin Act, a resident of Hartford is given no process at all.
This appellee was not afforded a chance to defend herself. She may have
been the victim of an official\'s caprice. Only when the whole
proceedings leading to the pinning of an unsavory label on a person are
aired can oppressive results be prevented.

\[\* \* \*\]

### Paul v. Davis, 424 U.S. 693 (1976)

MR. JUSTICE REHNQUIST delivered the opinion of the Court.

Petitioner Paul is the Chief of Police of the Louisville, Ky., Division
of Police, while petitioner McDaniel occupies the same position in the
Jefferson County, Ky., Division of Police. In late 1972, they agreed to
combine their efforts for the purpose of alerting local area merchants
to possible shoplifters who might be operating during the Christmas
season. In early December, petitioners distributed to approximately 800
merchants in the Louisville metropolitan area a \"flyer,\" which began
as follows:

> "TO: BUSINESS MEN IN THE METROPOLITAN AREA
>
> The Chiefs of The Jefferson County and City of Louisville Police
> Departments, in an effort to keep their officers advised on
> shoplifting activity, have approved the attached alphabetically
> arranged flyer of subjects known to be active in this criminal field.
>
> This flyer is being distributed to you, the business man, so that you
> may inform your security personnel to watch for these subjects. These
> persons have been arrested during 1971 and 1972 or have been active in
> various criminal fields in high density shopping areas.
>
> Only the photograph and name of the subject is shown on this flyer; if
> additional information is desired, please forward a request in
> writing. . . ."

The flyer consisted of five pages of \"mug shot\" photos, arranged
alphabetically. Each page was headed:

"NOVEMBER 1972

CITY OF LOUISVILLE

JEFFERSON COUNTY

POLICE DEPARTMENTS

ACTIVE SHOPLIFTERS"

In approximately the center of page 2 there appeared photos and the name
of the respondent, Edward Charles Davis III.

Respondent appeared on the flyer because, on June 14, 1971, he had been
arrested in Louisville on a charge of shoplifting. He had been arraigned
on this charge in September, 1971, and, upon his plea of not guilty, the
charge had been \"filed away with leave \[to reinstate\],\" a
disposition which left the charge outstanding. Thus, at the time
petitioners caused the flyer to be prepared and circulated, respondent
had been charged with shoplifting but his guilt or innocence of that
offense had never been resolved. Shortly after circulation of the flyer,
the charge against respondent was finally dismissed by a judge of the
Louisville Police Court.

At the time the flyer was circulated, respondent was employed as a
photographer by the Louisville Courier-Journal and Times. The flyer, and
respondent\'s inclusion therein, soon came to the attention of
respondent\'s supervisor, the executive director of photography for the
two newspapers. This individual called respondent in to hear his version
of the events leading to his appearing in the flyer. Following this
discussion, the supervisor informed respondent that, although he would
not be fired, he \"had best not find himself in a similar situation\" in
the future.

Respondent thereupon brought this § 1983 action in the District Court
for the Western District of Kentucky, seeking redress for the alleged
violation of rights guaranteed to him by the Constitution of the United
States.

\[\* \* \*\]

Respondent\'s due process claim is grounded upon his assertion that the
flyer, and in particular the phrase \"Active Shoplifters\" appearing at
the head of the page upon which his name and photograph appear,
impermissibly deprived him of some \"liberty\" protected by the
Fourteenth Amendment. His complaint asserted that the \"active
shoplifter\" designation would inhibit him from entering business
establishments for fear of being suspected of shoplifting and possibly
apprehended, and would seriously impair his future employment
opportunities. Accepting that such consequences may flow from the flyer
in question, respondent\'s complaint would appear to state a classical
claim for defamation actionable in the courts of virtually every State.
Imputing criminal behavior to an individual is generally considered
defamatory per se, and actionable without proof of special damages.

Respondent brought his action, however, not in the state courts of
Kentucky, but in a United States District Court for that State. He
asserted not a claim for defamation under the laws of Kentucky, but a
claim that he had been deprived of rights secured to him by the
Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution. Concededly, if
the same allegations had been made about respondent by a private
individual, he would have nothing more than a claim for defamation under
state law. But, he contends, since petitioners are, respectively, an
official of city and of county government, his action is thereby
transmuted into one for deprivation by the State of rights secured under
the Fourteenth Amendment.

\[\* \* \*\]

If respondent\'s view is to prevail, a person arrested by law
enforcement officers who announce that they believe such person to be
responsible for a particular crime in order to calm the fears of an
aroused populace presumably obtains a claim against such officers under
§ 1983. And since it is surely far more clear from the language of the
Fourteenth Amendment that \"life\" is protected against state
deprivation than it is that reputation is protected against state
injury, it would be difficult to see why the survivors of an innocent
bystander mistakenly shot by a policeman or negligently killed by a
sheriff driving a government vehicle would not have claims equally
cognizable under § 1983.

It is hard to perceive any logical stopping place to such a line of
reasoning. Respondent\'s construction would seem almost necessarily to
result in every legally cognizable injury which may have been inflicted
by a state official acting under \"color of law\" establishing a
violation of the Fourteenth Amendment. We think it would come as a great
surprise to those who drafted and shepherded the adoption of that
Amendment to learn that it worked such a result, and a study of our
decisions convinces us they do not support the construction urged by
respondent.

\[\* \* \*\]

The second premise upon which the result reached by the Court of Appeals
could be rested \-- that the infliction by state officials of a
\"stigma\" to one\'s reputation is somehow different in kind from
infliction by a state official of harm to other interests protected by
state law \-- is equally untenable. The words \"liberty\" and
\"property,\" as used in the Fourteenth Amendment, do not, in terms,
single out reputation as a candidate for special protection over and
above other interests that may be protected by state law. While we have
in a number of our prior cases pointed out the frequently drastic effect
of the \"stigma\" which may result from defamation by the government in
a variety of contexts, this line of cases does not establish the
proposition that reputation alone, apart from some more tangible
interests such as employment, is either \"liberty\" or \"property\" by
itself sufficient to invoke the procedural protection of the Due Process
Clause. As we have said, the Court of Appeals, in reaching a contrary
conclusion, relied primarily upon Wisconsin v. Constantineau. We think
the correct import of that decision, however, must be derived from an
examination of the precedents upon which it relied, as well as
consideration of the other decisions by this Court, before and after
Constantineau, which bear upon the relationship between governmental
defamation and the guarantees of the Constitution. While not uniform in
their treatment of the subject, we think that the weight of our
decisions establishes no constitutional doctrine converting every
defamation by a public official into a deprivation of liberty within the
meaning of the Due Process Clause of the Fifth or Fourteenth Amendment.

\[\* \* \*\]

It was against this backdrop that the Court, in 1971, decided
Constantineau. There, the Court held that a Wisconsin statute
authorizing the practice of \"posting\" was unconstitutional because it
failed to provide procedural safeguards of notice and an opportunity to
be heard, prior to an individual\'s being \"posted.\" Under the statute,
\"posting\" consisted of forbidding in writing the sale or delivery of
alcoholic beverages to certain persons who were determined to have
become hazards to themselves, to their family, or to the community by
reason of their \"excessive drinking.\" The statute also made it a
misdemeanor to sell or give liquor to any person so posted.

\[\* \* \*\]

\"Posting,\" therefore, significantly altered her status as a matter of
state law, and it was that alteration of legal status which, combined
with the injury resulting from the defamation, justified the invocation
of procedural safeguards. The \"stigma\" resulting from the defamatory
character of the posting was doubtless an important factor in evaluating
the extent of harm worked by that act, but we do not think that such
defamation, standing alone, deprived Constantineau of any \"liberty\"
protected by the procedural guarantees of the Fourteenth Amendment.

\[\* \* \*\]

In each of these cases, as a result of the state action complained of, a
right or status previously recognized by state law was distinctly
altered or extinguished. It was this alteration, officially removing the
interest from the recognition and protection previously afforded by the
State, which we found sufficient to invoke the procedural guarantees
contained in the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. But the
interest in reputation alone which respondent seeks to vindicate in this
action in federal court is quite different from the \"liberty\" or
\"property\" recognized in those decisions. Kentucky law does not extend
to respondent any legal guarantee of present enjoyment of reputation
which has been altered as a result of petitioners\' actions. Rather, his
interest in reputation is simply one of a number which the State may
protect against injury by virtue of its tort law, providing a forum for
vindication of those interests by means of damages actions. And any harm
or injury to that interest, even where, as here, inflicted by an officer
of the State, does not result in a deprivation of any \"liberty\" or
\"property\" recognized by state or federal law, nor has it worked any
change of respondent\'s status as theretofore recognized under the
State\'s laws. For these reasons, we hold that the interest in
reputation asserted in this case is neither \"liberty\" nor \"property\"
guaranteed against state deprivation without due process of law.

Respondent in this case cannot assert denial of any right vouchsafed to
him by the State, and thereby protected under the Fourteenth Amendment.

Students
--------

### Goss v. Lopez, 419 U.S. 565 (1975)

MR. JUSTICE WHITE delivered the opinion of the Court.

This appeal by various administrators of the Columbus, Ohio, Public
School System (CPSS) challenges the judgment of a three-judge federal
court, declaring that appellees \-- various high school students in the
CPSS \-- were denied due process of law contrary to the command of the
Fourteenth Amendment in that they were temporarily suspended from their
high schools without a hearing either prior to suspension or within a
reasonable time thereafter, and enjoining the administrators to remove
all references to such suspensions from the students\' records.

Ohio law provides for free education to all children between the ages of
six and 21. Section 3313.66 of the Code empowers the principal of an
Ohio public school to suspend a pupil for misconduct for up to 10 days
or to expel him. In either case, he must notify the student\'s parents
within 24 hours and state the reasons for his action. A pupil who is
expelled, or his parents, may appeal the decision to the Board of
Education, and, in connection therewith, shall be permitted to be heard
at the board meeting. The Board may reinstate the pupil following the
hearing. No similar procedure is provided in § 3313.66 or any other
provision of state law for a suspended student. Aside from a regulation
tracking the statute, at the time of the imposition of the suspensions
in this case, the CPSS itself had not issued any written procedure
applicable to suspensions. Nor, so far as the record reflects, had any
of the individual high schools involved in this case. Each, however, had
formally or informally described the conduct for which suspension could
be imposed.

The nine named appellees, each of whom alleged that he or she had been
suspended from public high school in Columbus for up to 10 days without
a hearing pursuant to § 3313.66, filed an action under 42 U.S.C. § 1993
against the Columbus Board of Education and various administrators of
the CPSS. The complaint sought a declaration that § 3313.66 was
unconstitutional in that it permitted public school administrators to
deprive plaintiffs of their rights to an education without a hearing of
any kind, in violation of the procedural due process component of the
Fourteenth Amendment. \[\* \* \*\]

The proof below established that the suspensions arose out of a period
of widespread student unrest in the CPSS during February and March,
1971. Six of the named plaintiffs, Rudolph Sutton, Tyrone Washington,
Susan Cooper, Deborah Fox, Clarence Byars, and Bruce Harris, were
students at the Marion-Franklin High School and were each suspended for
10 days on account of disruptive or disobedient conduct committed in the
presence of the school administrator who ordered the suspension. One of
these, Tyrone Washington, was among a group of students demonstrating in
the school auditorium while a class was being conducted there. He was
ordered by the school principal to leave, refused to do so, and was
suspended. Rudolph Sutton, in the presence of the principal, physically
attacked a police officer who was attempting to remove Tyrone Washington
from the auditorium. He was immediately suspended. The other four
Marion-Franklin students were suspended for similar conduct. None was
given a hearing to determine the operative facts underlying the
suspension, but each, together with his or her parents, was offered the
opportunity to attend a conference, subsequent to the effective date of
the suspension, to discuss the student\'s future.

Two named plaintiffs, Dwight Lopez and Betty Crome, were students at the
Central High School and McGuffey Junior High School, respectively. The
former was suspended in connection with a disturbance in the lunchroom
which involved some physical damage to school property. Lopez testified
that at least 75 other students were suspended from his school on the
same day. He also testified below that he was not a party to the
destructive conduct, but was instead an innocent bystander. Because no
one from the school testified with regard to this incident, there is no
evidence in the record indicating the official basis for concluding
otherwise. Lopez never had a hearing.

Betty Crome was present at a demonstration at a high school other than
the one she was attending. There she was arrested together with others,
taken to the police station, and released without being formally
charged. Before she went to school on the following day, she was
notified that she had been suspended for a 10-day period. Because no one
from the school testified with respect to this incident, the record does
not disclose how the McGuffey Junior High School principal went about
making the decision to suspend Crome, nor does it disclose on what
information the decision was based. It is clear from the record that no
hearing was ever held.

There was no testimony with respect to the suspension of the ninth named
plaintiff, Carl Smith. The school files were also silent as to his
suspension, although as to some, but not all, of the other named
plaintiffs the files contained either direct references to their
suspensions or copies of letters sent to their parents advising them of
the suspension.

On the basis of this evidence, the three-judge court declared that
plaintiffs were denied due process of law because they were \"suspended
without hearing prior to suspension or within a reasonable time
thereafter,\" and that Ohio Rev.Code Ann. § 3313.66 (1972) and
regulations issued pursuant thereto were unconstitutional in permitting
such suspensions. \[Footnote 6\] It was ordered that all references to
plaintiffs\' suspensions be removed from school files.

\[\* \* \*\]

At the outset, appellants contend that, because there is no
constitutional right to an education at public expense, the Due Process
Clause does not protect against expulsions from the public school
system. This position misconceives the nature of the issue, and is
refuted by prior decisions. The Fourteenth Amendment forbids the State
to deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due process
of law. Protected interests in property are normally \"not created by
the Constitution. Rather, they are created and their dimensions are
defined\" by an independent source such as state statutes or rules
entitling the citizen to certain benefits. *Board of Regents v. Roth.
\[\* \* \*\] Although Ohio may not be constitutionally obligated to
establish and maintain a public school system, it has nevertheless done
so, and has required its children to attend. \[\* \* \*\] The authority
possessed by the State to prescribe and enforce standards of conduct in
its schools although concededly very broad, must be exercised
consistently with constitutional safeguards. Among other things, the
State is constrained to recognize a student\'s legitimate entitlement to
a public education as a property interest which is protected by the Due
Process Clause and which may not be taken away for misconduct without
adherence to the minimum procedures required by that Clause.*

*The Due Process Clause also forbids arbitrary deprivations of liberty.
\"Where a person\'s good name, reputation, honor, or integrity is at
stake because of what the government is doing to him,\" the minimal
requirements of the Clause must be satisfied. Wisconsin v.
Constantineau, Board of Regents v. Roth. School authorities here
suspended appellees from school for periods of up to 10 days based on
charges of misconduct. If sustained and recorded, those charges could
seriously damage the students\' standing with their fellow pupils and
their teachers as well as interfere with later opportunities for higher
education and employment. It is apparent that the claimed right of the
State to determine unilaterally and without process whether that
misconduct has occurred immediately collides with the requirements of
the Constitution.*

*Appellants proceed to argue that, even if there is a right to a public
education protected by the Due Process Clause generally, the Clause
comes into play only when the State subjects a student to a \"severe
detriment or grievous loss.\" The loss of 10 days, it is said, is
neither severe nor grievous and the Due Process Clause is therefore of
no relevance. Appellants\' argument is again refuted by our prior
decisions; for in determining \"whether due process requirements apply
in the first place, we must look not to the \'weight\' but to the nature
of the interest at stake.\" Appellees were excluded from school only
temporarily, it is true, but the length and consequent severity of a
deprivation, while another factor to weigh in determining the
appropriate form of hearing, \"is not decisive of the basic right\" to a
hearing of some kind. The Court\'s view has been that, as long as a
property deprivation is not de minimis, its gravity is irrelevant to the
question whether account must be taken of the Due Process Clause. A
10-day suspension from school is not de minimis, in our view, and may
not be imposed in complete disregard of the Due Process Clause.*

*A short suspension is, of course, a far milder deprivation than
expulsion. But, \"education is perhaps the most important function of
state and local governments,\" Brown v. Board of Education, and the
total exclusion from the educational process for more than a trivial
period, and certainly if the suspension is for 10 days, is a serious
event in the life of the suspended child. Neither the property interest
in educational benefits temporarily denied nor the liberty interest in
reputation, which is also implicated, is so insubstantial that
suspensions may constitutionally be imposed by any procedure the school
chooses, no matter how arbitrary.*

*\[\* \* \*\]*

At the very minimum, therefore, students facing suspension and the
consequent interference with a protected property interest must be given
some kind of notice and afforded *some* kind of hearing. \"\[\* \* \*\]

It also appears from our cases that the timing and content of the notice
and the nature of the hearing will depend on appropriate accommodation
of the competing interests involved. The student\'s interest is to avoid
unfair or mistaken exclusion from the educational process, with all of
its unfortunate consequences. The Due Process Clause will not shield him
from suspensions properly imposed, but it disserves both his interest
and the interest of the State if his suspension is, in fact,
unwarranted. The concern would be mostly academic if the disciplinary
process were a totally accurate, unerring process, never mistaken and
never unfair. Unfortunately, that is not the case, and no one suggests
that it is. Disciplinarians, although proceeding in utmost good faith,
frequently act on the reports and advice of others; and the controlling
facts and the nature of the conduct under challenge are often disputed.
The risk of error is not at all trivial, and it should be guarded
against if that may be done without prohibitive cost or interference
with the educational process.

The difficulty is that our schools are vast and complex. Some modicum of
discipline and order is essential if the educational function is to be
performed. Events calling for discipline are frequent occurrences, and
sometimes require immediate, effective action. Suspension is considered
not only to be a necessary tool to maintain order, but a valuable
educational device. The prospect of imposing elaborate hearing
requirements in every suspension case is viewed with great concern, and
many school authorities may well prefer the untrammeled power to act
unilaterally, unhampered by rules about notice and hearing. But it would
be a strange disciplinary system in an educational institution if no
communication was sought by the disciplinarian with the student in an
effort to inform him of his dereliction and to let him tell his side of
the story in order to make sure that an injustice is not done.

We do not believe that school authorities must be totally free from
notice and hearing requirements if their schools are to operate with
acceptable efficiency. Students facing temporary suspension have
interests qualifying for protection of the Due Process Clause, and due
process requires, in connection with a suspension of 10 days or less,
that the student be given oral or written notice of the charges against
him and, if he denies them, an explanation of the evidence the
authorities have and an opportunity to present his side of the story.
The Clause requires at least these rudimentary precautions against
unfair or mistaken findings of misconduct and arbitrary exclusion from
school.

There need be no delay between the time \"notice\" is given and the time
of the hearing. In the great majority of cases the disciplinarian may
informally discuss the alleged misconduct with the student minutes after
it has occurred. We hold only that, in being given an opportunity to
explain his version of the facts at this discussion, the student first
be told what he is accused of doing and what the basis of the accusation
is. \[\* \* \*\] Since the hearing may occur almost immediately
following the misconduct, it follows that as a general rule notice and
hearing should precede removal of the student from school. We agree with
the District Court, however, that there are recurring situations in
which prior notice and hearing cannot be insisted upon. Students whose
presence poses a continuing danger to persons or property or an ongoing
threat of disrupting the academic process may be immediately removed
from school. In such cases, the necessary notice and rudimentary hearing
should follow as soon as practicable, as the District Court indicated.

In holding as we do, we do not believe that we have imposed procedures
on school disciplinarians which are inappropriate in a classroom
setting. Instead we have imposed requirements which are, if anything,
less than a fair-minded school principal would impose upon himself in
order to avoid unfair suspensions. Indeed, according to the testimony of
the principal of Marion-Franklin High School, that school had an
informal procedure, remarkably similar to that which we now require,
applicable to suspensions generally but which was not followed in this
case. Similarly, according to the most recent memorandum applicable to
the entire CPSS, *see* n 1, *supra,* school principals in the CPSS are
now required by local rule to provide at least as much as the
constitutional minimum which we have described.

We stop short of construing the Due Process Clause to require,
countrywide, that hearings in connection with short suspensions must
afford the student the opportunity to secure counsel, to confront and
cross-examine witnesses supporting the charge, or to call his own
witnesses to verify his version of the incident. Brief disciplinary
suspensions are almost countless. To impose in each such case even
truncated trial-type procedures might well overwhelm administrative
facilities in many places and, by diverting resources, cost more than it
would save in educational effectiveness. Moreover, further formalizing
the suspension process and escalating its formality and adversary nature
may not only make it too costly as a regular disciplinary tool, but also
destroy its effectiveness as part of the teaching process.

On the other hand, requiring effective notice and informal hearing
permitting the student to give his version of the events will provide a
meaningful hedge against erroneous action. At least the disciplinarian
will be alerted to the existence of disputes about facts and arguments
about cause and effect. He may then determine himself to summon the
accuser, permit cross-examination, and allow the student to present his
own witnesses. In more difficult cases, he may permit counsel. In any
event, his discretion will be more informed and we think the risk of
error substantially reduced.

Requiring that there be at least an informal give-and-take between
student and disciplinarian, preferably prior to the suspension, will add
little to the factfinding function where the disciplinarian himself has
witnessed the conduct forming the basis for the charge. But things are
not always as they seem to be, and the student will at least have the
opportunity to characterize his conduct and put it in what he deems the
proper context.

We should also make it clear that we have addressed ourselves solely to
the short suspension, not exceeding 10 days. Longer suspensions or
expulsions for the remainder of the school term, or permanently, may
require more formal procedures. Nor do we put aside the possibility
that, in unusual situations, although involving only a short suspension,
something more than the rudimentary procedures will be required.

MR. JUSTICE POWELL, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, MR. JUSTICE BLACKMUN,
and MR. JUSTICE REHNQUIST join, dissenting.

The Court\'s decision rests on the premise that, under Ohio law,
education is a property interest protected by the Fourteenth
Amendment\'s Due Process Clause, and therefore that any suspension
requires notice and a hearing. \[Footnote 2/3\] In my view, a student\'s
interest in education is not infringed by a suspension within the
limited period prescribed by Ohio law. Moreover, to the extent that
there may be some arguable infringement, it is too speculative,
transitory, and insubstantial to justify imposition of a
*constitutional* rule.

\[\* \* \*\]

In identifying property interests subject to due process protections,
the Court\'s past opinions make clear that these interests \"are created
and their *dimensions are defined* by existing rules or understandings
that stem from an independent source such as state law.\" *Board of
Regents v. Roth*. The Ohio statute that creates the right to a \"free\"
education also explicitly authorizes a principal to suspend a student
for as much as 10 days. Thus, the very legislation which \"defines\" the
\"dimension\" of the student\'s entitlement, while providing a right to
education generally, does not establish this right free of discipline
imposed in accord with Ohio law. Rather, the right is encompassed in the
entire package of statutory provisions governing education in Ohio \--
of which the power to suspend is one.

The Court thus disregards the basic structure of Ohio law in posturing
this case as if Ohio had conferred an unqualified right to education,
thereby compelling the school authorities to conform to due process
procedures in imposing the most routine discipline.

**Notes on Goss.**

1\. In Justice Powell's dissent we see here, as in the welfare cases,
the debate about whether the state, when it grants a property interest
which it may administratively take away, grants that interest *subject
to* it's power to remove it, or whether that power becomes subject to
procedural due process review. And once again, the latter position
prevails.

2\. Could the state have drafted the education statute differently to
avoid this problem? Suppose the statute guaranteed a free education to
every student who has never been arrested?

Prisoners
---------

### Sandin v. Conner, 515 U.S. 472 (1995)

Chief Justice Rehnquist delivered the opinion of the Court.

We granted certiorari to reexamine the circumstances under which state
prison regulations afford inmates a liberty interest protected by the
Due Process Clause.

DeMont Conner was convicted of numerous state crimes, including murder,
kidnaping, robbery, and burglary, for which he is currently serving an
indeterminate sentence of 30 years to life in a Hawaii prison. He was
confined in the Halawa Correctional Facility, a maximum security prison
in central Oahu. In August 1987, a prison officer escorted him from his
cell to the module program area. The officer subjected Conner to a strip
search, complete with an inspection of the rectal area. Conner retorted
with angry and foul language directed at the officer. Eleven days later
he received notice that he had been charged with disciplinary
infractions. The notice charged Conner with \"high misconduct\" for
using physical interference to impair a correctional function, and \"low
moderate misconduct\" for using abusive or obscene language and for
harassing employees.

Conner appeared before an adjustment committee on August 28, 1987. The
committee refused Conner\'s request to present witnesses at the hearing,
stating that \"\[w\]itnesses were unavailable due to move \[sic\] to the
medium facility and being short staffed on the modules.\" At the
conclusion of proceedings, the committee determined that Conner was
guilty of the alleged misconduct. It sentenced him to 30 days
disciplinary segregation in the Special Holding Unit for the physical
obstruction charge, and four hours segregation for each of the other two
charges to be served concurrent with the 30 days. Conner\'s segregation
began August 31, 1987, and ended September 29, 1987.

Conner sought administrative review within 14 days of receiving the
committee\'s decision. Nine months later, the deputy administrator found
the high misconduct charge unsupported and expunged Conner\'s
disciplinary record with respect to that charge. But before the Deputy
Administrator decided the appeal, Conner had brought this suit against
the adjustment committee chair and other prison officials in the United
States District Court for the District of Hawaii based on 42 U.S.C. §
1983. His amended complaint prayed for injunctive relief, declaratory
relief and damages for, among other things, a deprivation of procedural
due process in connection with the disciplinary hearing.

\[*discussing, and rejecting, prior caselaw which tied due process
analysis to the rights given in prison regulations --PG*\]

\[W\]e recognize that States may under certain circumstances create
liberty interests which are protected by the Due Process Clause. But
these interests will be generally limited to freedom from restraint
which, while not exceeding the sentence in such an unexpected manner as
to give rise to protection by the Due Process Clause of its own force,
see, e.g., Vitek, (transfer to mental hospital), and Washington,
(involuntary administration of psychotropic drugs), nonetheless imposes
atypical and significant hardship on the inmate in relation to the
ordinary incidents of prison life.

Conner asserts, incorrectly, that any state action taken for a punitive
reason encroaches upon a liberty interest under the Due Process Clause
even in the absence of any state regulation. Neither Bell v. Wolfish nor
Ingraham v. Wright requires such a rule. Bell dealt with the interests
of pretrial detainees and not convicted prisoners. The Court in Bell
correctly noted that a detainee \"may not be punished prior to an
adjudication of guilt in accordance with due process of law.\" The Court
expressed concern that a State would attempt to punish a detainee for
the crime for which he was indicted via preconviction holding
conditions. Such a course would improperly extend the legitimate reasons
for which such persons are detained\--to ensure their presence at trial.

The same distinction applies to Ingraham, which addressed the rights of
schoolchildren to remain free from arbitrary corporal punishment. The
Court noted that the Due Process Clause historically encompassed the
notion that the state could not \"physically punish an individual except
in accordance with due process of law\" and so found schoolchildren
sheltered. Although children sent to public school are lawfully confined
to the classroom, arbitrary corporal punishment represents an invasion
of personal security to which their parents do not consent when
entrusting the educational mission to the State.

The punishment of incarcerated prisoners, on the other hand, serves
different aims than those found invalid in Bell and Ingraham. The
process does not impose retribution in lieu of a valid conviction, nor
does it maintain physical control over free citizens forced by law to
subject themselves to state control over the educational mission. It
effectuates prison management and prisoner rehabilitative goals.
Admittedly, prisoners do not shed all constitutional rights at the
prison gate, but \"\[l\]awful incarceration brings about the necessary
withdrawal or limitation of many privileges and rights, a retraction
justified by the considerations underlying our penal system.\"
Discipline by prison officials in response to a wide range of misconduct
falls within the expected parameters of the sentence imposed by a court
of law.

This case, though concededly punitive, does not present a dramatic
departure from the basic conditions of Conner\'s indeterminate sentence.
Although Conner points to dicta in cases implying that solitary
confinement automatically triggers due process protection, this Court
has not had the opportunity to address in an argued case the question
whether disciplinary confinement of inmates itself implicates
constitutional liberty interests. We hold that Conner\'s discipline in
segregated confinement did not present the type of atypical, significant
deprivation in which a state might conceivably create a liberty
interest. The record shows that, at the time of Conner\'s punishment,
disciplinary segregation, with insignificant exceptions, mirrored those
conditions imposed upon inmates in administrative segregation and
protective custody. We note also that the State expunged Conner\'s
disciplinary record with respect to the \"high misconduct\" charge 9
months after Conner served time in segregation. Thus, Conner\'s
confinement did not exceed similar, but totally discretionary
confinement in either duration or degree of restriction. Indeed, the
conditions at Halawa involve significant amounts of \"lockdown time\"
even for inmates in the general population. Based on a comparison
between inmates inside and outside disciplinary segregation, the
State\'s actions in placing him there for 30 days did not work a major
disruption in his environment.

Nor does Conner\'s situation present a case where the State\'s action
will inevitably affect the duration of his sentence. Nothing in
Hawaii\'s code requires the parole board to deny parole in the face of a
misconduct record or to grant parole in its absence, even though
misconduct is by regulation a relevant consideration. The decision to
release a prisoner rests on a myriad of considerations. And, the
prisoner is afforded procedural protection at his parole hearing in
order to explain the circumstances behind his misconduct record.. The
chance that a finding of misconduct will alter the balance is simply too
attenuated to invoke the procedural guarantees of the Due Process
Clause.

We hold, therefore, that neither the Hawaii prison regulation in
question, nor the Due Process Clause itself, afforded Conner a protected
liberty interest that would entitle him to the procedural protections
set forth in Wolff. The regime to which he was subjected as a result of
the misconduct hearing was within the range of confinement to be
normally expected for one serving an indeterminate term of 30 years to
life.

**Notes on Prisoners and Due Process**

1\. In [Vitek v. Jones]{.underline}, 445 U.S. 480 (1980), the Court held
that the transfer of a prisoner to a mental hospital was not within the
expected range of terms of confinement under his sentence, and required
notice and an opportunity to be heard, in view of "the stigmatizing
consequences of a transfer to a mental hospital for involuntary
psychiatric treatment, coupled with the subjection of the prisoner to
mandatory behavior modification as a treatment for mental illness."

2\. The Prison Litigation Reform Act contains numerous procedural
restrictions on lawsuits charging illegal prison conditions, including a
requirement that prisoners first exhaust administrative remedies, a
prohibition against suits alleging emotional injury without physical
harm, and a "three strikes" provision which forbids *in forma pauperis*
actions by a prisoner who has thrice been found to have brought
frivolous litigation. Is this consistent with procedural due
process?[^7]

**Emergencies**

[In re A.C., 573 A.2d 1235 (D.C. App. 1990)]{.underline}

This case comes before the court for the second time. In *In re A.C.,
533 A.2d 611 (D.C. 1987)*, a three-judge motions division denied a
motion to stay an order of the trial court which had authorized a
hospital to perform a caesarean section on a dying woman in an effort to
save the life of her unborn child. The operation was performed, but both
the mother and the child died. \[\* \* \*\]

We are confronted here with two profoundly difficult and complex issues.
First, we must determine who has the right to decide the course of
medical treatment for a patient who, although near death, is pregnant
with a viable fetus. Second, we must establish how that decision should
be made if the patient cannot make it for herself \-- more specifically,
how a court should proceed when faced with a pregnant patient, *in
extremis*, who is apparently incapable of making an informed decision
regarding medical care for herself and her fetus. \[\* \* \*\]

\[A\]ny judicial proceeding in a case such as this will ordinarily take
place \-- like the one before us here \-- under time constraints so
pressing that it is difficult or impossible for the mother to
communicate adequately with counsel, or for counsel to organize an
effective factual and legal presentation in defense of her liberty and
privacy interests and bodily integrity. Any intrusion implicating such
basic values ought not to be lightly undertaken when the mother not only
is precluded from conducting pre-trial discovery (to which she would be
entitled as a matter of course in any controversy over even a modest
amount of money) but also is in no position to prepare meaningfully for
trial. As one commentator has noted: "The procedural shortcomings
rampant in these cases are not mere technical deficiencies. They
undermine the authority of the decisions themselves, posing serious
questions as to whether judges can, in the absence of genuine notice,
adequate representation, explicit standards of proof, and right of
appeal, realistically frame principled and useful legal responses to the
dilemmas with which they are being confronted. Certainly courts dealing
with other kinds of medical decision-making conflicts have insisted both
upon much more rigorous procedural standards and upon significantly more
information."

In at least one case, a woman whose objection to a caesarean delivery
had been overridden by a court went into hiding and gave birth to her
child vaginally. In another case, \"a 16-year-old pregnant girl in
Wisconsin has been held in secure detention for the sake of her fetus
because she tended to be on the run and to lack motivation or ability to
seek prenatal care.\"

In this case A.C.\'s court-appointed attorney was unable even to meet
with his client before the hearing. By the time the case was heard,
A.C.\'s condition did not allow her to be present, nor was it reasonably
possible for the judge to hear from her directly. The factual record,
moreover, was significantly flawed because A.C.\'s medical records were
not before the court and because Dr. Jeffrey Moscow, the physician who
had been treating A.C. for many years, was not even contacted and hence
did not testify. Finally, the time for legal preparation was so minimal
that neither the court nor counsel mentioned the doctrine of substituted
judgment, which \-- with benefit of briefs, oral arguments, and above
all, time \-- we now deem critical to the outcome of this case. We
cannot be at all certain that the trial judge would have reached the
same decision if the testimony of Dr. Moscow and the abundant legal
scholarship filed in this court had been meaningfully available to him,
and if there had been enough time for him to consider and reflect on
these matters as a judge optimally should do.

[Pemberton v. Tallahassee Memorial Regional Medical Center, 66 F.Supp.2d
1247 (N.D. Fla. 1999)]{.underline}

This action arises from a state court\'s order compelling plaintiff
Laura L. Pemberton, who was in labor attempting vaginal delivery at home
at the conclusion of a full-term pregnancy, to submit to a caesarean
section that was medically necessary in order to avoid a substantial
risk that her baby would die during delivery. Based on the state
court\'s order, physicians on the medical staff of the defendant
hospital performed the caesarean section, resulting in the birth of a
healthy baby. Ms. Pemberton suffered no complications.

Ms. Pemberton asserts the procedure was not medically necessary. She
claims the physicians who rendered opinions that the procedure *was*
medically necessary (and for whose actions the hospital has accepted
responsibility), as well as the hospital itself, acted under color of
state law. Ms. Pemberton claims the hospital and physicians violated her
substantive constitutional rights and her right to procedural due
process. \[\* \* \*\]

The hospital set in motion a procedure devised several years earlier
(and used once previously) to deal with patients who refuse to consent
to medically necessary treatment. The hospital called its long-time
attorney, John D. Buchanan, Jr., who in turn called William N. Meggs,
the State Attorney for Florida\'s Second Judicial Circuit, where
Tallahassee is located. Mr. Meggs, who had the responsibility under
Florida law to institute any court proceeding seeking to compel a
medical procedure without a patient\'s consent, deputized Mr. Buchanan
as a special assistant state attorney for purposes of dealing with this
matter. Mr. Buchanan contacted Second Circuit Chief Judge Phillip J.
Padovano, advised him of the situation and of Mr. Buchanan\'s intent to
file a petition on behalf of the State of Florida seeking a court order
requiring Ms. Pemberton to submit to a caesarean section, and requested
a hearing.

Judge Padovano went to the hospital and convened a hearing in the office
of hospital Senior Vice President and Chief Medical Officer Dr. Jack
MacDonald. In response to the judge\'s questions, Drs. Thompson,
Brickler and O\'Bryan testified unequivocally that vaginal birth would
pose a substantial risk of uterine rupture and resulting death of the
baby.

Judge Padovano ordered Ms. Pemberton returned to the hospital. Mr. Meggs
and a law enforcement officer went to Ms. Pemberton\'s home and advised
her she had been ordered to return to the hospital. She returned to the
hospital by ambulance against her will.

Judge Padovano then continued the hearing in Ms. Pemberton\'s room at
the hospital. Both she and Mr. Pemberton were allowed to express their
views. The judge ordered that a caesarean section be performed. \[\* \*
\*\]

Ms. Pemberton also claims she was denied \[\*\*22\] procedural due
process. This claim is unfounded on the merits and in any event would
provide no basis for relief in this court.

First, the merits. The state judge afforded Ms. Pemberton notice and an
opportunity to be heard prior to ordering performance of the caesarean
section. She and Mr. Pemberton took the opportunity and were in fact
heard by the court. Under the circumstances, this was all the process
that was feasible. The baby\'s birth was imminent; convening a full
adversary hearing with greater advance notice would have been
impossible. The notice and opportunity to be heard that the Pembertons
in fact received thus constituted all the process that was due. *See,
e.g., Goss v. Lopez,* (recognizing that Due Process Clause does not
invariably require full adversary hearing but that more limited process
may be sufficient in given circumstances); *Nash v. Auburn Univ., 812
F.2d 655, 660 (11th Cir. 1987)* (noting that \"what process is due is
measured by a flexible standard that depends on the practical
requirements of the circumstances\"); *Fed. R. Civ. P. 65* (recognizing
court\'s ability to enter emergency order with less than full adversary
hearing and even, in appropriate circumstances, without notice).

Second, this court would in any event have no authority to review the
procedures followed by a state court in deciding a case within its
jurisdiction. If the Pembertons were dissatisfied with the state
court\'s procedures or decision, their remedy was to appeal. Federal
review of any ultimate decision of the Florida state courts would have
been available only in the United States Supreme Court by petition for
writ of certiorari. Federal district courts do not have jurisdiction to
hear challenges to state court rulings. \[*citing Rooker-Feldman
Doctrine*\]

**Impartial tribunals**

[Caperton v. A. T. Massey Coal Co., 556 U.S. 868 (2009)]{.underline}

Justice Kennedy delivered the opinion of the Court.

In this case the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia reversed a
trial court judgment, which had entered a jury verdict of \$50 million.
Five justices heard the case, and the vote to reverse was 3 to 2. The
question presented is whether the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment was violated when one of the justices in the majority denied a
recusal motion. The basis for the motion was that the justice had
received campaign contributions in an extraordinary amount from, and
through the efforts of, the board chairman and principal officer of the
corporation found liable for the damages.

Under our precedents there are objective standards that require recusal
when "the probability of actual bias on the part of the judge or
decisionmaker is too high to be constitutionally tolerable." Withrow v.
Larkin, 421 U. S. 35, 47 (1975). Applying those precedents, we find
that, in all the circumstances of this case, due process requires
recusal.

\[\* \* \*\]

Don Blankenship is Massey's chairman, chief executive officer, and
president. After the verdict but before the appeal, West Virginia held
its 2004 judicial elections. Knowing the Supreme Court of Appeals of
West Virginia would consider the appeal in the case, Blankenship decided
to support an attorney who sought to replace Justice McGraw. Justice
McGraw was a candidate for reelection to that court. The attorney who
sought to replace him was Brent Benjamin.

In addition to contributing the \$1,000 statutory maximum to Benjamin's
campaign committee, Blankenship donated almost \$2.5 million to "And For
The Sake Of The Kids," a political organization formed under 26 U. S. C.
§527. The §527 organization opposed McGraw and supported Benjamin.
Blankenship's donations accounted for more than two-thirds of the total
funds it raised. This was not all. Blankenship spent, in addition, just
over \$500,000 on independent expenditures---for direct mailings and
letters soliciting donations as well as television and newspaper
advertisements---" 'to support ... Brent Benjamin.' "

To provide some perspective, Blankenship's \$3 million in contributions
were more than the total amount spent by all other Benjamin supporters
and three times the amount spent by Benjamin's own committee. Caperton
contends that Blankenship spent \$1 million more than the total amount
spent by the campaign committees of both candidates combined.

Benjamin won. He received 382,036 votes (53.3%), and McGraw received
334,301 votes (46.7%).

In October 2005, before Massey filed its petition for appeal in West
Virginia's highest court, Caperton moved to disqualify now-Justice
Benjamin under the Due Process Clause and the West Virginia Code of
Judicial Conduct, based on the conflict caused by Blankenship's campaign
involvement. Justice Benjamin denied the motion in April 2006. He
indicated that he "carefully considered the bases and accompanying
exhibits proffered by the movants." But he found "no objective
information ... to show that this Justice has a bias for or against any
litigant, that this Justice has prejudged the matters which comprise
this litigation, or that this Justice will be anything but fair and
impartial." In December 2006 Massey filed its petition for appeal to
challenge the adverse jury verdict. The West Virginia Supreme Court of
Appeals granted review.

In November 2007 that court reversed the \$50 million verdict against
Massey. The majority opinion, authored by then-Chief Justice Davis and
joined by Justices Benjamin and Maynard, found that "Massey's conduct
warranted the type of judgment rendered in this case." It reversed,
nevertheless, based on two independent grounds---first, that a
forum-selection clause contained in a contract to which Massey was not a
party barred the suit in West Virginia, and, second, that res judicata
barred the suit due to an out-of-state judgment to which Massey was not
a party. Justice Starcher dissented, stating that the "majority's
opinion is morally and legally wrong." Justice Albright also dissented,
accusing the majority of "misapplying the law and introducing sweeping
'new law' into our jurisprudence that may well come back to haunt us."

Caperton sought rehearing, and the parties moved for disqualification of
three of the five justices who decided the appeal. Photos had surfaced
of Justice Maynard vacationing with Blankenship in the French Riviera
while the case was pending. Justice Maynard granted Caperton's recusal
motion. On the other side Justice Starcher granted Massey's recusal
motion, apparently based on his public criticism of Blankenship's role
in the 2004 elections. In his recusal memorandum Justice Starcher urged
Justice Benjamin to recuse himself as well. He noted that "Blankenship's
bestowal of his personal wealth, political tactics, and 'friendship'
have created a cancer in the affairs of this Court." Justice Benjamin
declined Justice Starcher's suggestion and denied Caperton's recusal
motion.

The court granted rehearing. Justice Benjamin, now in the capacity of
acting chief justice, selected Judges Cookman and Fox to replace the
recused justices. Caperton moved a third time for disqualification,
arguing that Justice Benjamin had failed to apply the correct standard
under West Virginia law---i.e., whether "a reasonable and prudent
person, knowing these objective facts, would harbor doubts about Justice
Benjamin's ability to be fair and impartial." Caperton also included the
results of a public opinion poll, which indicated that over 67% of West
Virginians doubted Justice Benjamin would be fair and impartial. Justice
Benjamin again refused to withdraw, noting that the "push poll" was
"neither credible nor sufficiently reliable to serve as the basis for an
elected judge's disqualification."

In April 2008 a divided court again reversed the jury verdict, and again
it was a 3-to-2 decision. Justice Davis filed a modified version of his
prior opinion, repeating the two earlier holdings. She was joined by
Justice Benjamin and Judge Fox. Justice Albright, joined by Judge
Cookman, dissented: "Not only is the majority opinion unsupported by the
facts and existing case law, but it is also fundamentally unfair. Sadly,
justice was neither honored nor served by the majority." The dissent
also noted "genuine due process implications arising under federal law"
with respect to Justice Benjamin's failure to recuse himself.

Four months later---a month after the petition for writ of certiorari
was filed in this Court---Justice Benjamin filed a concurring opinion.
He defended the merits of the majority opinion as well as his decision
not to recuse. He rejected Caperton's challenge to his participation in
the case under both the Due Process Clause and West Virginia law.
Justice Benjamin reiterated that he had no " ' direct, personal,
substantial, pecuniary interest' in this case.'" Adopting "a standard
merely of 'appearances,' " he concluded, "seems little more than an
invitation to subject West Virginia's justice system to the vagaries of
the day---a framework in which predictability and stability yield to
supposition, innuendo, half-truths, and partisan manipulations."

\[\* \* \*\]

Caperton contends that Blankenship's pivotal role in getting Justice
Benjamin elected created a constitutionally intolerable probability of
actual bias. Though not a bribe or criminal influence, Justice Benjamin
would nevertheless feel a debt of gratitude to Blankenship for his
extraordinary efforts to get him elected. \[\* \* \*\]

Justice Benjamin was careful to address the recusal motions and explain
his reasons why, on his view of the controlling standard,
disqualification was not in order. In four separate opinions issued
during the course of the appeal, he explained why no actual bias had
been established. He found no basis for recusal because Caperton failed
to provide "objective evidence" or "objective information," but merely
"subjective belief" of bias. Nor could anyone "point to any actual
conduct or activity on \[his\] part which could be termed 'improper.' "
In other words, based on the facts presented by Caperton, Justice
Benjamin conducted a probing search into his actual motives and
inclinations; and he found none to be improper. We do not question his
subjective findings of impartiality and propriety. Nor do we determine
whether there was actual bias.

\[\* \* \*\]

The difficulties of inquiring into actual bias, and the fact that the
inquiry is often a private one, simply underscore the need for objective
rules. Otherwise there may be no adequate protection against a judge who
simply misreads or misapprehends the real motives at work in deciding
the case. The judge's own inquiry into actual bias, then, is not one
that the law can easily superintend or review, though actual bias, if
disclosed, no doubt would be grounds for appropriate relief. In lieu of
exclusive reliance on that personal inquiry, or on appellate review of
the judge's determination respecting actual bias, the Due Process Clause
has been implemented by objective standards that do not require proof of
actual bias. In defining these standards the Court has asked whether,
"under a realistic appraisal of psychological tendencies and human
weakness," the interest "poses such a risk of actual bias or prejudgment
that the practice must be forbidden if the guarantee of due process is
to be adequately implemented."

We turn to the influence at issue in this case. Not every campaign
contribution by a litigant or attorney creates a probability of bias
that requires a judge's recusal, but this is an exceptional case. We
conclude that there is a serious risk of actual bias---based on
objective and reasonable perceptions---when a person with a personal
stake in a particular case had a significant and disproportionate
influence in placing the judge on the case by raising funds or directing
the judge's election campaign when the case was pending or imminent. The
inquiry centers on the contribution's relative size in comparison to the
total amount of money contributed to the campaign, the total amount
spent in the election, and the apparent effect such contribution had on
the outcome of the election.

Applying this principle, we conclude that Blankenship's campaign efforts
had a significant and disproportionate influence in placing Justice
Benjamin on the case. Blankenship contributed some \$3 million to unseat
the incumbent and replace him with Benjamin. His contributions eclipsed
the total amount spent by all other Benjamin supporters and exceeded by
300% the amount spent by Benjamin's campaign committee. Caperton claims
Blankenship spent \$1 million more than the total amount spent by the
campaign committees of both candidates combined.

Massey responds that Blankenship's support, while significant, did not
cause Benjamin's victory. In the end the people of West Virginia elected
him, and they did so based on many reasons other than Blankenship's
efforts. Massey points out that every major state newspaper, but one,
endorsed Benjamin. It also contends that then-Justice McGraw cost
himself the election by giving a speech during the campaign, a speech
the opposition seized upon for its own advantage.

\[\* \* \*\]

Whether Blankenship's campaign contributions were a necessary and
sufficient cause of Benjamin's victory is not the proper inquiry. Much
like determining whether a judge is actually biased, proving what
ultimately drives the electorate to choose a particular candidate is a
difficult endeavor, not likely to lend itself to a certain conclusion.
This is particularly true where, as here, there is no procedure for
judicial factfinding and the sole trier of fact is the one accused of
bias. Due process requires an objective inquiry into whether the
contributor's influence on the election under all the circumstances
"would offer a possible temptation to the average . . . judge to ...
lead him not to hold the balance nice, clear and true." Blankenship's
campaign contributions---in comparison to the total amount contributed
to the campaign, as well as the total amount spent in the election---had
a significant and disproportionate influence on the electoral outcome.
And the risk that Blankenship's influence engendered actual bias is
sufficiently substantial that it "must be forbidden if the guarantee of
due process is to be adequately implemented."

The temporal relationship between the campaign contributions, the
justice's election, and the pendency of the case is also critical. It
was reasonably foreseeable, when the campaign contributions were made,
that the pending case would be before the newly elected justice. The
\$50 million adverse jury verdict had been entered before the election,
and the Supreme Court of Appeals was the next step once the state trial
court dealt with post-trial motions. So it became at once apparent that,
absent recusal, Justice Benjamin would review a judgment that cost his
biggest donor's company \$50 million. Although there is no allegation of
a quid pro quo agreement, the fact remains that Blankenship's
extraordinary contributions were made at a time when he had a vested
stake in the outcome. Just as no man is allowed to be a judge in his own
cause, similar fears of bias can arise when---without the consent of the
other parties---a man chooses the judge in his own cause. And applying
this principle to the judicial election process, there was here a
serious, objective risk of actual bias that required Justice Benjamin's
recusal.

Justice Benjamin did undertake an extensive search for actual bias. But,
as we have indicated, that is just one step in the judicial process;
objective standards may also require recusal whether or not actual bias
exists or can be proved. Due process "may sometimes bar trial by judges
who have no actual bias and who would do their very best to weigh the
scales of justice equally between contending parties." The failure to
consider objective standards requiring recusal is not consistent with
the imperatives of due process. We find that Blankenship's significant
and disproportionate influence---coupled with the temporal relationship
between the election and the pending case---" ' "offer a possible
temptation to the average ... judge to ... lead him not to hold the
balance nice, clear and true." ' " On these extreme facts the
probability of actual bias rises to an unconstitutional level.

Chief Justice Roberts, with whom Justice Scalia, Justice Thomas, and
Justice Alito join, dissenting.

I, of course, share the majority's sincere concerns about the need to
maintain a fair, independent, and impartial judiciary---and one that
appears to be such. But I fear that the Court's decision will undermine
rather than promote these values.

Until today, we have recognized exactly two situations in which the
Federal Due Process Clause requires disqualification of a judge: when
the judge has a financial interest in the outcome of the case, and when
the judge is trying a defendant for certain criminal contempts. Vaguer
notions of bias or the appearance of bias were never a basis for
disqualification, either at common law or under our constitutional
precedents. Those issues were instead addressed by legislation or court
rules.

Today, however, the Court enlists the Due Process Clause to overturn a
judge's failure to recuse because of a "probability of bias." Unlike the
established grounds for disqualification, a "probability of bias" cannot
be defined in any limited way. The Court's new "rule" provides no
guidance to judges and litigants about when recusal will be
constitutionally required. This will inevitably lead to an increase in
allegations that judges are biased, however groundless those charges may
be. The end result will do far more to erode public confidence in
judicial impartiality than an isolated failure to recuse in a particular
case.

\[\* \* \*\]

Our decisions in this area have also emphasized when the Due Process
Clause does not require recusal:

"All questions of judicial qualification may not involve constitutional
validity. Thus matters of kinship, personal bias, state policy,
remoteness of interest, would seem generally to be matters merely of
legislative discretion."

Subject to the two well-established exceptions described above,
questions of judicial recusal are regulated by "common law, statute, or
the professional standards of the bench and bar."

In any given case, there are a number of factors that could give rise to
a "probability" or "appearance" of bias: friendship with a party or
lawyer, prior employment experience, membership in clubs or
associations, prior speeches and writings, religious affiliation, and
countless other considerations. We have never held that the Due Process
Clause requires recusal for any of these reasons, even though they could
be viewed as presenting a "probability of bias." Many state statutes
require recusal based on a probability or appearance of bias, but "that
alone would not be sufficient basis for imposing a *constitutional*
requirement under the Due Process Clause." \[\* \* \*\]

In departing from this clear line between when recusal is
constitutionally required and when it is not, the majority repeatedly
emphasizes the need for an "objective" standard. The majority's analysis
is "objective" in that it does not inquire into Justice Benjamin's
motives or decisionmaking process. But the standard the majority
articulates---"probability of bias"---fails to provide clear, workable
guidance for future cases. At the most basic level, it is unclear
whether the new probability of bias standard is somehow limited to
financial support in judicial elections, or applies to judicial recusal
questions more generally.

But there are other fundamental questions as well. With little help from
the majority, courts will now have to determine:

1\. How much money is too much money? What level of contribution or
expenditure gives rise to a "probability of bias"?

2\. How do we determine whether a given expenditure is
"disproportionate"? Disproportionate to what?

3\. Are independent, non-coordinated expenditures treated the same as
direct contributions to a candidate's campaign? What about contributions
to independent outside groups supporting a candidate?

4\. Does it matter whether the litigant has contributed to other
candidates or made large expenditures in connection with other
elections?

5\. Does the amount at issue in the case matter? What if this case were
an employment dispute with only \$10,000 at stake? What if the
plaintiffs only sought non-monetary relief such as an injunction or
declaratory judgment?

6\. Does the analysis change depending on whether the judge whose
disqualification is sought sits on a trial court, appeals court, or
state supreme court?

7\. How long does the probability of bias last? Does the probability of
bias diminish over time as the election recedes? Does it matter whether
the judge plans to run for reelection?

8\. What if the "disproportionately" large expenditure is made by an
industry association, trade union, physicians' group, or the plaintiffs'
bar? Must the judge recuse in all cases that affect the association's
interests? Must the judge recuse in all cases in which a party or lawyer
is a member of that group? Does it matter how much the litigant
contributed to the association?

9\. What if the case involves a social or ideological issue rather than
a financial one? Must a judge recuse from cases involving, say, abortion
rights if he has received "disproportionate" support from individuals
who feel strongly about either side of that issue? If the supporter
wants to help elect judges who are "tough on crime," must the judge
recuse in all criminal cases?

10\. What if the candidate draws "disproportionate" support from a
particular racial, religious, ethnic, or other group, and the case
involves an issue of particular importance to that group?

11\. What if the supporter is not a party to the pending or imminent
case, but his interests will be affected by the decision? Does the
Court's analysis apply if the supporter "chooses the judge" not in his
case, but in someone else's?

12\. What if the case implicates a regulatory issue that is of great
importance to the party making the expenditures, even though he has no
direct financial interest in the outcome (e.g., a facial challenge to an
agency rulemaking or a suit seeking to limit an agency's jurisdiction)?

13\. Must the judge's vote be outcome determinative in order for his
non-recusal to constitute a due process violation?

14\. Does the due process analysis consider the underlying merits of the
suit? Does it matter whether the decision is clearly right (or wrong) as
a matter of state law?

15\. What if a lower court decision in favor of the supporter is
affirmed on the merits on appeal, by a panel with no "debt of gratitude"
to the supporter? Does that "moot" the due process claim?

16\. What if the judge voted against the supporter in many other cases?

17\. What if the judge disagrees with the supporter's message or
tactics? What if the judge expressly disclaims the support of this
person?

18\. Should we assume that elected judges feel a "debt of hostility"
towards major opponents of their candidacies? Must the judge recuse in
cases involving individuals or groups who spent large amounts of money
trying unsuccessfully to defeat him?

19\. If there is independent review of a judge's recusal decision, e.g.,
by a panel of other judges, does this completely foreclose a due process
claim?

20\. Does a debt of gratitude for endorsements by newspapers, interest
groups, politicians, or celebrities also give rise to a constitutionally
unacceptable probability of bias? How would we measure whether such
support is disproportionate?

21\. Does close personal friendship between a judge and a party or
lawyer now give rise to a probability of bias?

22\. Does it matter whether the campaign expenditures come from a party
or the party's attorney? If from a lawyer, must the judge recuse in
every case involving that attorney?

23\. Does what is unconstitutional vary from State to State? What if
particular States have a history of expensive judicial elections?

24\. Under the majority's "objective" test, do we analyze the due
process issue through the lens of a reasonable person, a reasonable
lawyer, or a reasonable judge?

25\. What role does causation play in this analysis? The Court sends
conflicting signals on this point. The majority asserts that
"\[w\]hether Blankenship's campaign contributions were a necessary and
sufficient cause of Benjamin's victory is not the proper inquiry." But
elsewhere in the opinion, the majority considers "the apparent effect
such contribution had on the outcome of the election," and whether the
litigant has been able to "choos\[e\] the judge in his own cause." If
causation is a pertinent factor, how do we know whether the contribution
or expenditure had any effect on the outcome of the election? What if
the judge won in a landslide? What if the judge won primarily because of
his opponent's missteps?

26\. Is the due process analysis less probing for incumbent judges---who
typically have a great advantage in elections---than for challengers?

27\. How final must the pending case be with respect to the
contributor's interest? What if, for example, the only issue on appeal
is whether the court should certify a class of plaintiffs? Is recusal
required just as if the issue in the pending case were ultimate
liability?

28\. Which cases are implicated by this doctrine? Must the case be
pending at the time of the election? Reasonably likely to be brought?
What about an important but unanticipated case filed shortly after the
election?

29\. When do we impute a probability of bias from one party to another?
Does a contribution from a corporation get imputed to its executives,
and vice-versa? Does a contribution or expenditure by one family member
get imputed to other family members?

30\. What if the election is nonpartisan? What if the election is just a
yes-or-no vote about whether to retain an incumbent?

31\. What type of support is disqualifying? What if the supporter's
expenditures are used to fund voter registration or get-out-the-vote
efforts rather than television advertisements?

32\. Are contributions or expenditures in connection with a primary
aggregated with those in the general election? What if the contributor
supported a different candidate in the primary? Does that dilute the
debt of gratitude?

\[\* \* \*\]

38\. If a judge erroneously fails to recuse, do we apply harmless-error
review?

39\. Does the judge get to respond to the allegation that he is probably
biased, or is his reputation solely in the hands of the parties to the
case?

40\. What if the parties settle a Caperton claim as part of a broader
settlement of the case? Does that leave the judge with no way to salvage
his reputation?

These are only a few uncertainties that quickly come to mind. Judges and
litigants will surely encounter others when they are forced to, or wish
to, apply the majority's decision in different circumstances. Today's
opinion requires state and federal judges simultaneously to act as
political scientists (why did candidate X win the election?), economists
(was the financial support disproportionate?), and psychologists (is
there likely to be a debt of gratitude?).

The Court's inability to formulate a "judicially discernible and
manageable standard" strongly counsels against the recognition of a
novel constitutional right. The need to consider these and countless
other questions helps explain why the common law and this Court's
constitutional jurisprudence have never required disqualification on
such vague grounds as "probability" or "appearance" of bias.

To its credit, the Court seems to recognize that the inherently
boundless nature of its new rule poses a problem. But the majority's
only answer is that the present case is an "extreme" one, so there is no
need to worry about other cases. The Court repeats this point over and
over.

But this is just so much whistling past the graveyard. Claims that have
little chance of success are nonetheless frequently filed. The success
rate for certiorari petitions before this Court is approximately 1.1%,
and yet the previous Term some 8,241 were filed. Every one of the
"Caperton motions" or appeals or §1983 actions will claim that the judge
is biased, or probably biased, bringing the judge and the judicial
system into disrepute. And all future litigants will assert that their
case is really the most extreme thus far.

**Notes on *Massey* and Impartial Tribunals**

1\. Is the Court really applying, as Kennedy suggests, "objective rules"
in deciding this case? Is the loose balancing test the Court seems to be
applying any easier to apply than a subjective inquiry into a judge's
actual bias?

2\. If a hearing is due, it must be before an officer or tribunal
without a personal or institutional interest in the outcome. *Ward v.
Village of Monroeville*, 409 U.S. 57 (1972) invalidated a statute
permitting a local mayor, responsible for municipal finance, from trying
traffic offenses where those proceeds would go to the village. *Gibson
v. Berryhill*, 411 U.S. 564 (1973) ruled that an optometry board
comprised of members of association of independent optometrists could
not adjudicate a charge by that association that non-independent
optometrists were violating statutory standards of professional conduct,
because of the board members' financial incentive to eliminate their
competitors. *Mayberry v. Pennsylvania*, 400 U. S. 455 (1971) held that
a criminal contempt defendant could not be tried before the judge whom
he had insulted, where those insults were the basis for the contempt
charge. *Mayberry* is particularly striking, in two respects: first, the
defendant's insults were largely attempts to question the judge's
partiality (albeit hostile and offensive attempts), and second, the
judge attempted to sentence the defendant to *11-22 years in prison* for
11 distinct insulting dialogues. Justice Harlan's concurrence seems to
capture the nub of it:

> \[T\]hese contempt convictions must be regarded as infected by the
> fact that the unprecedented long sentence of 22 years which they
> carried was imposed by a judge who himself had been the victim of
> petitioner\'s shockingly abusive conduct. That circumstance seems to
> me to deprive the contempt proceeding of the appearance of evenhanded
> justice which is at the core of due process.

Other Issues
------------

### Notice of Civil Litigation

In *Jones v. Flowers*, 547 U.S. 220 (2006), the Court held that mailing
of two certified letters which were returned undeliverable, plus a
notice published in the newspaper, were insufficient to provide notice
of a pending tax sale of plaintiff's real estate. In *United State Aid
Funds v. Espinosa*, the Court held that a bankruptcy judgment
discharging a student loan (despite its statutory non-dischargability)
due to the creditor's failure to object to the plan. This holding was
given despite the fact that the debtor had not served the creditor as
required by the Bankruptcy Rules, because the creditor had actual notice
of the claim. *Of interest*: Does the difference between litigation
brought by the government and litigation brought by private parties make
any difference to the amount of notice required?

### "Virtual Representation" and the Application of Claim and Issue Preclusion to Nonparties

In *Taylor v. Sturgell*, 533 U.S. 880 (2008), the Court, in a 9-0
opinion, ruled that a plaintiff could not be "virtually represented,"
for purposes of precluding a lawsuit, because a prior plaintiff had
filed suit based on the same facts with the same attorney. The Court
characterized the "virtual representation" doctrine as an attempt to
create a common-law class action without the procedural requirements of
FRCP 23, which are "grounded in due process."

[Driving]{.underline}
---------------------

### In *Mackey v. Montyrm*, 443 U.S. 1 (1979), the Court held that a driver's license is a property interest for due process purposes, but, in view of the *Matthews v. Eldridge* factors, that a post-deprivation hearing was adequate.

[About the Author]{.underline}

Paul Gowder is an associate professor of law at the University of Iowa
who teaches constitutional law, legal ethics, and similar subjects. His
research occupies the nexus between jurisprudence and constitutional
law, and currently focuses on the rule of law, a topic at which, over
the last few years, he\'s been hurling a diverse array of tools and
methods, including analytic philosophy, game theory, empirical
data-crunching, and even ancient history---to the point that he resorted
to learning Attic Greek in order to write a couple of papers about how
the rule of law worked in Athens. Currently, he is at work on a book
manuscript tentatively entitled *A Commitment to Equality: the Rule of
Law in the Real World*. He also inserts himself into areas as diverse as
the constitutionality of Obamacare, the countermajoritarian problem, the
concept of race, and theories of liberty. He is a former public interest
lawyer, who practiced with a private civil rights law firm in
Alexandria, Virginia, and a legal aid organization in Ontario, Oregon,
as well as a former New Orleans jazz band manager.

[Change Log]{.underline}

Version 1.2, December 1, 2013: added additional text to introduction for
students, added Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co.

[^1]: *See generally*, Paul Gowder, *The Rule of Law and Equality*, 32
    [Law & Philosophy]{.smallcaps} 565 (2013).

[^2]: Significant pruning in the text of cases are indicated by
    bracketed asterisks; minor pruning and removal of citations are not
    indicated.

[^3]: 28 Edward III, cap. 3; *Statutes of the Realm* I, 345.

[^4]: [Lawrence Tribe, American Constitutional Law 666]{.smallcaps}
    (2^nd^ ed., 1988) (emphasis in original)

[^5]: Paul Gowder, *The Rule of Law and Equality*, 32 [Law &
    Philosophy]{.smallcaps} 565 (2013).

[^6]: *See, generally*, Jeremy Waldron, *The Rule of Law and the
    Importance of Procedure*, in James Fleming, ed., [Nomos L: Getting
    to the Rule of Law]{.smallcaps} 3 (2011).

[^7]: John Boston of the Legal Aid Society has prepared a detailed
    analysis of the PRLA, which as of this writing may be found online
    at http://www.law.yale.edu/documents/pdf/Boston\_PLRA\_Treatise.pdf.
