Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555 (1992)


SCALIA, J., announced the judgment of the Court and delivered the opinion of
the Court with respect to Parts I, II, III-A, and IV, in which REHNQUIST,
C.J., and WHITE, KENNEDY, SOUTER, and THOMAS, JJ., joined, and an opinion with
respect to Part III-B, in which REHNQUIST, C.J., and WHITE and THOMAS, JJ.,
joined. KENNEDY, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment, in which SOUTER, J., joined. STEVENS, J., filed an opinion
concurring in the judgment. BLACKMUN, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which
O'CONNOR, J., joined.

Justice SCALIA delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to Parts I, II,
III-A, and IV, and an opinion with respect to Part III-B in which the Chief
Justice, Justice WHITE, and Justice THOMAS join.

This case involves a challenge to a rule promulgated by the Secretary of the
Interior interpreting § 7 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (ESA), 87
Stat. 884, 892, as amended, 16 U.S.C. § 1536, in such fashion as to render it
applicable only to actions within the United States or on the high seas. The
preliminary issue, and the only one we reach, is whether the respondents here,
plaintiffs below, have standing to seek judicial review of the rule.

The ESA seeks to protect species of animals against threats to their continuing existence caused by man. The ESA instructs the Secretary of the Interior to promulgate by regulation a list of those species which are either endangered or threatened under enumerated criteria, and to define the critical habitat of these species. Section 7(a)(2) of the Act then provides, in pertinent part:

> Each Federal agency shall, in consultation with and with the assistance of the Secretary [of the Interior], insure that any action authorized, funded, or carried out by such agency . . . is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered species or threatened species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of habitat of such species which is determined by the Secretary, after consultation as appropriate with affected States, to be critical.

In 1978, the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) and the National Marine Fisheries
Service (NMFS), on behalf of the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary
of Commerce respectively, promulgated a joint regulation stating that the
obligations imposed by § 7(a)(2) extend to actions taken in foreign nations.
43 Fed.Reg. 874 (1978). The next year, however, the Interior Department began
to reexamine its position. Letter from Leo Kuliz, Solicitor, Department of the
Interior, to Assistant Secretary, Fish and Wildlife and Parks, Aug. 8, 1979. A
revised joint regulation, reinterpreting § 7(a)(2) to require consultation
only for actions taken in the United States or on the high seas, was proposed
in 1983, 48 Fed.Reg. 29990 (1983), and promulgated in 1986, 51 Fed.Reg. 19926
(1986); 50 C.F.R. 402.01 (1991).

5

Shortly thereafter, respondents, organizations dedicated to wildlife
conservation and other environmental causes, filed this action against the
Secretary of the Interior, seeking a declaratory judgment that the new
regulation is in error as to the geographic scope of § 7(a)(2), and an
injunction requiring the Secretary to promulgate a new regulation restoring
the initial interpretation. The District Court granted the Secretary's motion
to dismiss for lack of standing. _Defenders of Wildlife v. Hodel,_ 658 F.Supp.
43, 47-48 (Minn.1987). The Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reversed by
a divided vote. _Defenders of Wildlife v. Hodel,_ 851 F.2d 1035 (1988). On
remand, the Secretary moved for summary judgment on the standing issue, and
respondents moved for summary judgment on the merits. The District Court
denied the Secretary's motion, on the ground that the Eighth Circuit had
already determined the standing question in this case; it granted respondents'
merits motion, and ordered the Secretary to publish a revised regulation.
_Defenders of Wildlife v. Hodel,_ 707 F.Supp. 1082 (Minn.1989). The Eighth
Circuit affirmed. 911 F.2d 117 (1990). We granted certiorari, 500 U.S. ----,
111 S.Ct. 2008, 114 L.Ed.2d 97 (1991).

II

6

While the Constitution of the United States divides all power conferred upon
the Federal Government into "legislative Powers," Art. I, § 1, "[t]he
executive Power," Art. II, § 1, and "[t]he judicial Power," Art. III, § 1, it
does not attempt to define those terms. To be sure, it limits the jurisdiction
of federal courts to "Cases" and "Controversies," but an executive inquiry can
bear the name "case" (the Hoffa case) and a legislative dispute can bear the
name "controversy" (the Smoot-Hawley controversy). Obviously, then, the
Constitution's central mechanism of separation of powers depends largely upon
common understanding of what activities are appropriate to legislatures, to
executives, and to courts. In The Federalist No. 48, Madison expressed the
view that "[i]t is not infrequently a question of real nicety in legislative
bodies whether the operation of a particular measure will, or will not, extend
beyond the legislative sphere," whereas "the executive power [is] restrained
within a narrower compass and . . . more simple in its nature," and "the
judiciary [is] described by landmarks still less uncertain." The Federalist
No. 48, p. 256 (Carey and McClellan eds. 1990). One of those landmarks,
setting apart the "Cases" and "Controversies" that are of the justiciable sort
referred to in Article III--"serv[ing] to identify those disputes which are
appropriately resolved through the judicial process," _Whitmore v. Arkansas,_
495 U.S. 149, 155, 110 S.Ct. 1717, 1722-1723, 109 L.Ed.2d 135 (1990)--is the
doctrine of standing. Though some of its elements express merely prudential
considerations that are part of judicial self-government, the core component
of standing is an essential and unchanging part of the case-or-controversy
requirement of Article III. See, _e.g., Allen v. Wright,_ 468 U.S. 737, 751,
104 S.Ct. 3315, 3324, 82 L.Ed.2d 556 (1984).

7

Over the years, our cases have established that the irreducible constitutional
minimum of standing contains three elements: First, the plaintiff must have
suffered an "injury in fact"--an invasion of a legally-protected interest
which is (a) concrete and particularized, see _id.,_ at 756, 104 S.Ct., at
3327; _Warth v. Seldin,_ 422 U.S. 490, 508, 95 S.Ct. 2197, 2210, 45 L.Ed.2d
343 (1975); _Sierra Club v. Morton,_ 405 U.S. 727, 740-741, n. 16, 92 S.Ct.
1361, 1368-1369, n. 16, 31 L.Ed.2d 636 (1972);1 and (b) "actual or imminent,
not 'conjectural' or 'hypothetical,' " _Whitmore, supra,_ 495 U.S., at 155,
110 S.Ct., at 1723 (quoting _Los Angeles v. Lyons,_ 461 U.S. 95, 102, 103
S.Ct. 1660, 1665, 75 L.Ed.2d 675 (1983)). Second, there must be a causal
connection between the injury and the conduct complained of--the injury has to
be "fairly . . . trace[able] to the challenged action of the defendant, and
not . . . th[e] result [of] the independent action of some third party not
before the court." Simon v. Eastern Kentucky Welfare Rights Org., 426 U.S. 26,
41-42, 96 S.Ct. 1917, 1926, 48 L.Ed.2d 450 (1976). Third, it must be "likely,"
as opposed to merely "speculative," that the injury will be "redressed by a
favorable decision." _Id.,_ at 38, 43, 96 S.Ct., at 1924, 1926.

8

The party invoking federal jurisdiction bears the burden of establishing these
elements. See _FW/PBS, Inc. v. Dallas,_ 493 U.S. 215, 231, 110 S.Ct. 596, 608,
107 L.Ed.2d 603 (1990); _Warth, supra,_ 422 U.S., at 508, 95 S.Ct., at 2210.
Since they are not mere pleading requirements but rather an indispensable part
of the plaintiff's case, each element must be supported in the same way as any
other matter on which the plaintiff bears the burden of proof, _i.e.,_ with
the manner and degree of evidence required at the successive stages of the
litigation. See _Lujan v. National Wildlife Federation,_ 497 U.S. 871,
883-889, 110 S.Ct. 3177, ---- - ----, 111 L.Ed.2d 695 (1990); _Gladstone,
Realtors v. Village of Bellwood,_ 441 U.S. 91, 114-115, and n. 31, 99 S.Ct.
1601, 1614-1615, and n. 31, 60 L.Ed.2d 66 (1979); _Simon, supra,_ 426 U.S., at
45, n. 25, 96 S.Ct., at 1927, and n. 25; _Warth, supra,_ 422 U.S., at 527, and
n. 6, 95 S.Ct., at 2219, and n. 6 (Brennan, J., dissenting). At the pleading
stage, general factual allegations of injury resulting from the defendant's
conduct may suffice, for on a motion to dismiss we "presum[e] that general
allegations embrace those specific facts that are necessary to support the
claim," _National Wildlife Federation, supra,_ 497 U.S., at 889, 110 S.Ct., at
3189. In response to a summary judgment motion, however, the plaintiff can no
longer rest on such "mere allegations," but must "set forth" by affidavit or
other evidence "specific facts," Fed.Rule Civ.Proc. 56(e), which for purposes
of the summary judgment motion will be taken to be true. And at the final
stage, those facts (if controverted) must be "supported adequately by the
evidence adduced at trial," _Gladstone, supra,_ 441 U.S., at 115, n. 31, 99
S.Ct., at 1616, n. 31.

9

When the suit is one challenging the legality of government action or
inaction, the nature and extent of facts that must be averred (at the summary
judgment stage) or proved (at the trial stage) in order to establish standing
depends considerably upon whether the plaintiff is himself an object of the
action (or forgone action) at issue. If he is, there is ordinarily little
question that the action or inaction has caused him injury, and that a
judgment preventing or requiring the action will redress it. When, however, as
in this case, a plaintiff's asserted injury arises from the government's
allegedly unlawful regulation (or lack of regulation) of _someone else,_ much
more is needed. In that circumstance, causation and redressability ordinarily
hinge on the response of the regulated (or regulable) third party to the
government action or inaction and perhaps on the response of others as well.
The existence of one or more of the essential elements of standing "depends on
the unfettered choices made by independent actors not before the courts and
whose exercise of broad and legitimate discretion the courts cannot presume
either to control or to predict," _ASARCO Inc. v. Kadish,_ 490 U.S. 605, 615,
109 S.Ct. 2037, 2044, 104 L.Ed.2d 696 (1989) (opinion of Kennedy, J.); see
also _Simon, supra,_ 426 U.S., at 41-42, 96 S.Ct., at 1925, 1926; and it
becomes the burden of the plaintiff to adduce facts showing that those choices
have been or will be made in such manner as to produce causation and permit
redressability of injury. _E.g., Warth, supra,_ 422 U.S., at 505, 95 S.Ct., at
2208. Thus, when the plaintiff is not himself the object of the government
action or inaction he challenges, standing is not precluded, but it is
ordinarily "substantially more difficult" to establish. _Allen, supra,_ 468
U.S., at 758, 104 S.Ct., at 3328; _Simon, supra,_ 426 U.S., at 44-45, 96
S.Ct., at 1927; _Warth, supra,_ 422 U.S., at 505, 95 S.Ct., at 2208.

III

10

We think the Court of Appeals failed to apply the foregoing principles in
denying the Secretary's motion for summary judgment. Respondents had not made
the requisite demonstration of (at least) injury and redressability.

A.

11

Respondents' claim to injury is that the lack of consultation with respect to
certain funded activities abroad "increas[es] the rate of extinction of
endangered and threatened species." Complaint ¶ 5, App. 13. Of course, the
desire to use or observe an animal species, even for purely aesthetic
purposes, is undeniably a cognizable interest for purpose of standing. See,
_e.g., Sierra Club v. Morton,_ 405 U.S., at 734, 92 S.Ct., at 1366. "But the
'injury in fact' test requires more than an injury to a cognizable interest.
It requires that the party seeking review be himself among the injured."
_Id.,_ at 734-735, 92 S.Ct., at 1366. To survive the Secretary's summary
judgment motion, respondents had to submit affidavits or other evidence
showing, through specific facts, not only that listed species were in fact
being threatened by funded activities abroad, but also that one or more of
respondents' members would thereby be "directly" affected apart from their "
'special interest' in th[e] subject." _Id.,_ at 735, 739, 92 S.Ct., at 1366,
1368. See generally _Hunt v. Washington State Apple Advertising Comm'n,_ 432
U.S. 333, 343, 97 S.Ct. 2434, 2441, 53 L.Ed.2d 383 (1977).

12

With respect to this aspect of the case, the Court of Appeals focused on the
affidavits of two Defenders' members--Joyce Kelly and Amy Skilbred. Ms. Kelly
stated that she traveled to Egypt in 1986 and "observed the traditional
habitat of the endangered nile crocodile there and intend[s] to do so again,
and hope[s] to observe the crocodile directly," and that she "will suffer harm
in fact as a result of [the] American . . . role . . . in overseeing the
rehabilitation of the Aswan High Dam on the Nile . . . and [in] develop[ing] .
. . Egypt's . . . Master Water Plan." App. 101. Ms. Skilbred averred that she
traveled to Sri Lanka in 1981 and "observed th[e] habitat" of "endangered
species such as the Asian elephant and the leopard" at what is now the site of
the Mahaweli Project funded by the Agency for International Development (AID),
although she "was unable to see any of the endangered species;" "this
development project," she continued, "will seriously reduce endangered,
threatened, and endemic species habitat including areas that I visited . . .
[, which] may severely shorten the future of these species;" that threat, she
concluded, harmed her because she "intend[s] to return to Sri Lanka in the
future and hope[s] to be more fortunate in spotting at least the endangered
elephant and leopard." _Id.,_ at 145-146. When Ms. Skilbred was asked at a
subsequent deposition if and when she had any plans to return to Sri Lanka,
she reiterated that "I intend to go back to Sri Lanka," but confessed that she
had no current plans: "I don't know [when]. There is a civil war going on
right now. I don't know. Not next year, I will say. In the future." _Id.,_ at
318.

13

We shall assume for the sake of argument that these affidavits contain facts
showing that certain agency-funded projects threaten listed species--though
that is questionable. They plainly contain no facts, however, showing how
damage to the species will produce "imminent" injury to Mss. Kelly and
Skilbred. That the women "had visited" the areas of the projects before the
projects commenced proves nothing. As we have said in a related context, "
'[p]ast exposure to illegal conduct does not in itself show a present case or
controversy regarding injunctive relief . . . if unaccompanied by any
continuing, present adverse effects.' " _Lyons,_ 461 U.S., at 102, 103 S.Ct.,
at 1665 (quoting _O'Shea v. Littleton,_ 414 U.S. 488, 495-496, 94 S.Ct. 669,
676, 38 L.Ed.2d 674 (1974)). And the affiants' profession of an "inten[t]" to
return to the places they had visited before--where they will presumably, this
time, be deprived of the opportunity to observe animals of the endangered
species--is simply not enough. Such "some day" intentions--without any
description of concrete plans, or indeed even any specification of _when_ the
some day will be--do not support a finding of the "actual or imminent" injury
that our cases require. See _supra,_ at 560.2

14

Besides relying upon the Kelly and Skilbred affidavits, respondents propose a
series of novel standing theories. The first, inelegantly styled "ecosystem
nexus," proposes that any person who uses _any part_ of a "contiguous
ecosystem" adversely affected by a funded activity has standing even if the
activity is located a great distance away. This approach, as the Court of
Appeals correctly observed, is inconsistent with our opinion in _National
Wildlife Federation,_ which held that a plaintiff claiming injury from
environmental damage must use the area affected by the challenged activity and
not an area roughly "in the vicinity" of it. 497 U.S., at 887-889, 110 S.Ct.,
at ---- - ----; see also _Sierra Club,_ 405 U.S., at 735, 92 S.Ct., at 1366.
It makes no difference that the general-purpose section of the ESA states that
the Act was intended in part "to provide a means whereby the ecosystems upon
which endangered species and threatened species depend may be conserved," 16
U.S.C. § 1531(b). To say that the Act protects ecosystems is not to say that
the Act creates (if it were possible) rights of action in persons who have not
been injured in fact, that is, persons who use portions of an ecosystem not
perceptibly affected by the unlawful action in question.

15

Respondents' other theories are called, alas, the "animal nexus" approach,
whereby anyone who has an interest in studying or seeing the endangered
animals anywhere on the globe has standing; and the "vocational nexus"
approach, under which anyone with a professional interest in such animals can
sue. Under these theories, anyone who goes to see Asian elephants in the Bronx
Zoo, and anyone who is a keeper of Asian elephants in the Bronx Zoo, has
standing to sue because the Director of AID did not consult with the Secretary
regarding the AID-funded project in Sri Lanka. This is beyond all reason.
Standing is not "an ingenious academic exercise in the conceivable," _United
States v. Students Challenging Regulatory Agency Procedures (SCRAP),_ 412 U.S.
669, 688, 93 S.Ct. 2405, 2416, 37 L.Ed.2d 254 (1973), but as we have said
requires, at the summary judgment stage, a factual showing of perceptible
harm. It is clear that the person who observes or works with a particular
animal threatened by a federal decision is facing perceptible harm, since the
very subject of his interest will no longer exist. It is even plausible--
though it goes to the outermost limit of plausibility--to think that a person
who observes or works with animals of a particular species in the very area of
the world where that species is threatened by a federal decision is facing
such harm, since some animals that might have been the subject of his interest
will no longer exist, see _Japan Whaling Assn. v. American Cetacean Soc.,_ 478
U.S. 221, 231, n. 4, 106 S.Ct. 2860, 2866, n. 4, 92 L.Ed.2d 166 (1986). It
goes beyond the limit, however, and into pure speculation and fantasy, to say
that anyone who observes or works with an endangered species, anywhere in the
world, is appreciably harmed by a single project affecting some portion of
that species with which he has no more specific connection.3

B

16

Besides failing to show injury, respondents failed to demonstrate
redressability. Instead of attacking the separate decisions to fund particular
projects allegedly causing them harm, the respondents chose to challenge a
more generalized level of government action (rules regarding consultation),
the invalidation of which would affect all overseas projects. This
programmatic approach has obvious practical advantages, but also obvious
difficulties insofar as proof of causation or redressability is concerned. As
we have said in another context, "suits challenging, not specifically
identifiable Government violations of law, but the particular programs
agencies establish to carry out their legal obligations . . . [are], even when
premised on allegations of several instances of violations of law, . . .
rarely if ever appropriate for federal-court adjudication." _Allen,_ 468 U.S.,
at 759-760, 104 S.Ct., at 3329.

17

The most obvious problem in the present case is redressability. Since the
agencies funding the projects were not parties to the case, the District Court
could accord relief only against the Secretary: He could be ordered to revise
his regulation to require consultation for foreign projects. But this would
not remedy respondents' alleged injury unless the funding agencies were bound
by the Secretary's regulation, which is very much an open question. Whereas in
other contexts the ESA is quite explicit as to the Secretary's controlling
authority, see, _e.g.,_ 16 U.S.C. § 1533(a)(1) ("The Secretary shall"
promulgate regulations determining endangered species); § 1535(d)(1) ("The
Secretary is authorized to provide financial assistance to any State"), with
respect to consultation the initiative, and hence arguably the initial
responsibility for determining statutory necessity, lies with the agencies,
see § 1536(a)(2) (" _Each Federal agency shall,_ in consultation with and with
the assistance of the Secretary, insure that any" funded action is not likely
to jeopardize endangered or threatened species) (emphasis added)). When the
Secretary promulgated the regulation at issue here, he thought it was binding
on the agencies, see 51 Fed.Reg., at 19928 (1986). The Solicitor General,
however, has repudiated that position here, and the agencies themselves
apparently deny the Secretary's authority. (During the period when the
Secretary took the view that § 7(a)(2) did apply abroad, AID and FWS engaged
in a running controversy over whether consultation was required with respect
to the Mahaweli project, AID insisting that consultation applied only to
domestic actions.)

18

Respondents assert that this legal uncertainty did not affect redressability
(and hence standing) because the District Court itself could resolve the issue
of the Secretary's authority as a necessary part of its standing inquiry.
Assuming that it is appropriate to resolve an issue of law such as this in
connection with a threshold standing inquiry, resolution by the District Court
would not have remedied respondents' alleged injury anyway, because it would
not have been binding upon the agencies. They were not parties to the suit,
and there is no reason they should be obliged to honor an incidental legal
determination the suit produced.4 The Court of Appeals tried to finesse this
problem by simply proclaiming that "[w]e are satisfied that an injunction
requiring the Secretary to publish [respondents' desired] regulatio[n] . . .
would result in consultation." _Defenders of Wildlife,_ 851 F.2d, at 1042,
1043-1044. We do not know what would justify that confidence, particularly
when the Justice Department (presumably after consultation with the agencies)
has taken the position that the regulation is not binding.5 The short of the
matter is that redress of the only injury-in-fact respondents complain of
requires action (termination of funding until consultation) by the individual
funding agencies; and any relief the District Court could have provided in
this suit against the Secretary was not likely to produce that action.

19

A further impediment to redressability is the fact that the agencies generally
supply only a fraction of the funding for a foreign project. AID, for example,
has provided less than 10% of the funding for the Mahaweli Project.
Respondents have produced nothing to indicate that the projects they have
named will either be suspended, or do less harm to listed species, if that
fraction is eliminated. As in _Simon,_ 426 U.S., at 43-44, 96 S.Ct., at
1926-1927, it is entirely conjectural whether the nonagency activity that
affects respondents will be altered or affected by the agency activity they
seek to achieve.6 There is no standing.

IV

20

The Court of Appeals found that respondents had standing for an additional
reason: because they had suffered a "procedural injury." The so-called
"citizen-suit" provision of the ESA provides, in pertinent part, that "any
person may commence a civil suit on his own behalf (A) to enjoin any person,
including the United States and any other governmental instrumentality or
agency . . . who is alleged to be in violation of any provision of this
chapter." 16 U.S.C. § 1540(g). The court held that, because § 7(a)(2) requires
interagency consultation, the citizen-suit provision creates a "procedural
righ[t]" to consultation in all "persons"--so that _anyone_ can file suit in
federal court to challenge the Secretary's (or presumably any other
official's) failure to follow the assertedly correct consultative procedure,
notwithstanding their inability to allege any discrete injury flowing from
that failure. 911 F.2d, at 121-122. To understand the remarkable nature of
this holding one must be clear about what it does _not_ rest upon: This is not
a case where plaintiffs are seeking to enforce a procedural requirement the
disregard of which could impair a separate concrete interest of theirs (
_e.g.,_ the procedural requirement for a hearing prior to denial of their
license application, or the procedural requirement for an environmental impact
statement before a federal facility is constructed next door to them).7 Nor is
it simply a case where concrete injury has been suffered by many persons, as
in mass fraud or mass tort situations. Nor, finally, is it the unusual case in
which Congress has created a concrete private interest in the outcome of a
suit against a private party for the government's benefit, by providing a cash
bounty for the victorious plaintiff. Rather, the court held that the injury-
in-fact requirement had been satisfied by congressional conferral upon _all_
persons of an abstract, self-contained, noninstrumental "right" to have the
Executive observe the procedures required by law. We reject this view.8

21

We have consistently held that a plaintiff raising only a generally available
grievance about government--claiming only harm to his and every citizen's
interest in proper application of the Constitution and laws, and seeking
relief that no more directly and tangibly benefits him than it does the public
at large--does not state an Article III case or controversy. For example, in
_Fairchild v. Hughes,_ 258 U.S. 126, 129-130, 42 S.Ct. 274, 275, 66 L.Ed. 499
(1922), we dismissed a suit challenging the propriety of the process by which
the Nineteenth Amendment was ratified. Justice Brandeis wrote for the Court:

22

"[This is] not a case within the meaning of . . . Article III. . . . Plaintiff
has [asserted] only the right, possessed by every citizen, to require that the
Government be administered according to law and that the public moneys be not
wasted. Obviously this general right does not entitle a private citizen to
institute in the federal courts a suit. . . ." _Ibid._

23

In _Frothingham v. Mellon,_ 262 U.S. 447, 43 S.Ct. 597, 67 L.Ed. 1078 (1923),
we dismissed for lack of Article III standing a taxpayer suit challenging the
propriety of certain federal expenditures. We said:

24

"The party who invokes the power [of judicial review] must be able to show not
only that the statute is invalid but that he has sustained or is immediately
in danger of sustaining some direct injury as the result of its enforcement,
and not merely that he suffers in some indefinite way in common with people
generally. . . . Here the parties plaintiff have no such case. . . . [T]heir
complaint . . . is merely that officials of the executive department of the
government are executing and will execute an act of Congress asserted to be
unconstitutional; and this we are asked to prevent. To do so would be not to
decide a judicial controversy, but to assume a position of authority over the
governmental acts of another and co-equal department, an authority which
plainly we do not possess." _Id.,_ at 488-489, 43 S.Ct., at 601.

25

In _Ex parte Levitt,_ 302 U.S. 633, 58 S.Ct. 1, 82 L.Ed. 493 (1937), we
dismissed a suit contending that Justice Black's appointment to this Court
violated the Ineligibility Clause, Art. I, § 6, cl. 2. "It is an established
principle," we said, "that to entitle a private individual to invoke the
judicial power to determine the validity of executive or legislative action he
must show that he has sustained or is immediately in danger of sustaining a
direct injury as the result of that action and it is not sufficient that he
has merely a general interest common to all members of the public." _Id.,_ at
634, 58 S.Ct., at 1. See also _Doremus v. Board of Ed. of Hawthorne,_ 342 U.S.
429, 433-434, 72 S.Ct. 394, 396-397, 96 L.Ed. 475 (1952) (dismissing taxpayer
action on the basis of _Frothingham_ ).

26

More recent cases are to the same effect. In _United States v. Richardson,_
418 U.S. 166, 94 S.Ct. 2940, 41 L.Ed.2d 678 (1974), we dismissed for lack of
standing a taxpayer suit challenging the Government's failure to disclose the
expenditures of the Central Intelligence Agency, in alleged violation of the
constitutional requirement, Art. I, § 9, cl. 7, that "a regular Statement and
Account of the Receipts and Expenditures of all public Money shall be
published from time to time." We held that such a suit rested upon an
impermissible "generalized grievance," and was inconsistent with "the
framework of Article III" because "the impact on [plaintiff] is plainly
undifferentiated and common to all members of the public." _Richardson,
supra,_ at 171, 176-177, 94 S.Ct., at 2944, 2946. And in _Schlesinger v.
Reservists Committee to Stop the War,_ 418 U.S. 208, 94 S.Ct. 2925, 41 L.Ed.2d
706 (1974), we dismissed for the same reasons a citizen-taxpayer suit
contending that it was a violation of the Incompatibility Clause, Art. I, § 6,
cl. 2, for Members of Congress to hold commissions in the military Reserves.
We said that the challenged action, "standing alone, would adversely affect
only the generalized interest of all citizens in constitutional governance. .
. . We reaffirm _Levitt_ in holding that standing to sue may not be predicated
upon an interest of th[is] kind. . . ." _Schlesinger, supra,_ at 217, 220, 94
S.Ct., at 2930, 2932. Since _Schlesinger_ we have on two occasions held that
an injury amounting only to the alleged violation of a right to have the
Government act in accordance with law was not judicially cognizable because
"assertion of a right to a particular kind of Government conduct, which the
Government has violated by acting differently, cannot alone satisfy the
requirements of Art. III without draining those requirements of meaning."
_Allen,_ 468 U.S., at 754, 104 S.Ct., at 3326; _Valley Forge Christian College
v. Americans United for Separation of Church and State, Inc.,_ 454 U.S. 464,
483, 102 S.Ct. 752, 764, 70 L.Ed.2d 700 (1982). And only two Terms ago, we
rejected the notion that Article III permits a citizen-suit to prevent a
condemned criminal's execution on the basis of "the public interest
protections of the Eighth Amendment;" once again, "[t]his allegation raise[d]
only the generalized interest of all citizens in constitutional governance . .
. and [was] an inadequate basis on which to grant . . . standing." _Whitmore,_
495 U.S., at 160, 110 S.Ct., at 1725.

27

To be sure, our generalized-grievance cases have typically involved Government
violation of procedures assertedly ordained by the Constitution rather than
the Congress. But there is absolutely no basis for making the Article III
inquiry turn on the source of the asserted right. Whether the courts were to
act on their own, or at the invitation of Congress, in ignoring the concrete
injury requirement described in our cases, they would be discarding a
principle fundamental to the separate and distinct constitutional role of the
Third Branch--one of the essential elements that identifies those "Cases" and
"Controversies" that are the business of the courts rather than of the
political branches. "The province of the court," as Chief Justice Marshall
said in _Marbury v. Madison,_ 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 170, 2 L.Ed. 60 (1803)
"is, solely, to decide on the rights of individuals." Vindicating the _public_
interest (including the public interest in government observance of the
Constitution and laws) is the function of Congress and the Chief Executive.
The question presented here is whether the public interest in proper
administration of the laws (specifically, in agencies' observance of a
particular, statutorily prescribed procedure) can be converted into an
individual right by a statute that denominates it as such, and that permits
all citizens (or, for that matter, a subclass of citizens who suffer no
distinctive concrete harm) to sue. If the concrete injury requirement has the
separation-of-powers significance we have always said, the answer must be
obvious: To permit Congress to convert the undifferentiated public interest in
executive officers' compliance with the law into an "individual right"
vindicable in the courts is to permit Congress to transfer from the President
to the courts the Chief Executive's most important constitutional duty, to
"take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed," Art. II, § 3\. It would
enable the courts, with the permission of Congress, "to assume a position of
authority over the governmental acts of another and co-equal department,"
_Frothingham v. Mellon,_ 262 U.S., at 489, 43 S.Ct., at 601, and to become "
'virtually continuing monitors of the wisdom and soundness of Executive
action.' " _Allen,_ 468 U.S., at 760, 104 S.Ct., at 3329 (quoting _Laird v.
Tatum,_ 408 U.S. 1, 15, 92 S.Ct. 2318, 2326, 33 L.Ed.2d 154 (1972)). We have
always rejected that vision of our role:

28

"When Congress passes an Act empowering administrative agencies to carry on
governmental activities, the power of those agencies is circumscribed by the
authority granted. This permits the courts to participate in law enforcement
entrusted to administrative bodies only to the extent necessary to protect
justiciable individual rights against administrative action fairly beyond the
granted powers. . . . This is very far from assuming that the courts are
charged more than administrators or legislators with the protection of the
rights of the people. Congress and the Executive supervise the acts of
administrative agents. . . . But under Article III, Congress established
courts to adjudicate cases and controversies as to claims of infringement of
individual rights whether by unlawful action of private persons or by the
exertion of unauthorized administrative power." _Stark v. Wickard,_ 321 U.S.
288, 309-310, 64 S.Ct. 559, 571, 88 L.Ed. 733 (1944).

29

"Individual rights," within the meaning of this passage, do not mean public
rights that have been legislatively pronounced to belong to each individual
who forms part of the public. See also _Sierra Club,_ 405 U.S., at 740-741, n.
16, 92 S.Ct., at 1369, n. 16.

30

Nothing in this contradicts the principle that "[t]he . . . injury required by
Art. III may exist solely by virtue of 'statutes creating legal rights, the
invasion of which creates standing.' " _Warth,_ 422 U.S., at 500, 95 S.Ct., at
2206 (quoting _Linda R. S. v. Richard D.,_ 410 U.S. 614, 617, n. 3, 93 S.Ct.
1146, 1148, n. 3, 35 L.Ed.2d 536 (1973)). Both of the cases used by _Linda R.
S._ as an illustration of that principle involved Congress's elevating to the
status of legally cognizable injuries concrete, _de facto_ injuries that were
previously inadequate in law (namely, injury to an individual's personal
interest in living in a racially integrated community, see _Trafficante v.
Metropolitan Life Ins. Co.,_ 409 U.S. 205, 208-212, 93 S.Ct. 364, 366-368, 34
L.Ed.2d 415 (1972), and injury to a company's interest in marketing its
product free from competition, see _Hardin v. Kentucky Utilities Co.,_ 390
U.S. 1, 6, 88 S.Ct. 651, 654, 19 L.Ed.2d 787 (1968)). As we said in _Sierra
Club,_ "[Statutory] broadening [of] the categories of injury that may be
alleged in support of standing is a different matter from abandoning the
requirement that the party seeking review must himself have suffered an
injury." 405 U.S., at 738, 92 S.Ct., at 1368. Whether or not the principle set
forth in _Warth_ can be extended beyond that distinction, it is clear that in
suits against the government, at least, the concrete injury requirement must
remain.

31

* * *

32

We hold that respondents lack standing to bring this action and that the Court
of Appeals erred in denying the summary judgment motion filed by the United
States. The opinion of the Court of Appeals is hereby reversed, and the cause
remanded for proceedings consistent with this opinion.

33

_It is so ordered._ Justice KENNEDY, with whom Justice SOUTER joins,
concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.

34

Although I agree with the essential parts of the Court's analysis, I write
separately to make several observations.

35

I agree with the Court's conclusion in Part III-A that, on the record before
us, respondents have failed to demonstrate that they themselves are "among the
injured." _Sierra Club v. Morton,_ 405 U.S. 727, 735, 92 S.Ct. 1361, 1366, 31
L.Ed.2d 636 (1972). This component of the standing inquiry is not satisfied
unless

36

"[p]laintiffs . . . demonstrate a 'personal stake in the outcome.' . . .
Abstract injury is not enough. The plaintiff must show that he 'has sustained
or is immediately in danger of sustaining some direct injury' as the result of
the challenged official conduct and the injury or threat of injury must be
both 'real and immediate,' not 'conjectural' or 'hypothetical.' " _Los Angeles
v. Lyons,_ 461 U.S. 95, 101-102, 103 S.Ct. 1660, 1665, 75 L.Ed.2d 675 (1983)
(citations omitted).

37

While it may seem trivial to require that Mss. Kelly and Skilbred acquire
airline tickets to the project sites or announce a date certain upon which
they will return, see _ante,_ at 564, this is not a case where it is
reasonable to assume that the affiants will be using the sites on a regular
basis, see _Sierra Club v. Morton, supra,_ 405 U.S., at 735, n. 8, 92 S.Ct.,
at 1366, n. 8, nor do the affiants claim to have visited the sites since the
projects commenced. With respect to the Court's discussion of respondents'
"ecosystem nexus," "animal nexus," and "vocational nexus" theories, _ante,_ at
565-567, I agree that on this record respondents' showing is insufficient to
establish standing on any of these bases. I am not willing to foreclose the
possibility, however, that in different circumstances a nexus theory similar
to those proffered here might support a claim to standing. See _Japan Whaling
Assn. v. American Cetacean Soc.,_ 478 U.S. 221, 231, n. 4, 106 S.Ct. 2860,
2866, n. 4, 92 L.Ed.2d 166 (1986) ("respondents . . . undoubtedly have alleged
a sufficient 'injury in fact' in that the whale watching and studying of their
members will be adversely affected by continued whale harvesting").

38

In light of the conclusion that respondents have not demonstrated a concrete
injury here sufficient to support standing under our precedents, I would not
reach the issue of redressability that is discussed by the plurality in Part
III-B.

39

I also join Part IV of the Court's opinion with the following observations. As
government programs and policies become more complex and far-reaching, we must
be sensitive to the articulation of new rights of action that do not have
clear analogs in our common-law tradition. Modern litigation has progressed
far from the paradigm of Marbury suing Madison to get his commission, _Marbury
v. Madison,_ 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) 137, 2 L.Ed. 60 (1803), or Ogden seeking an
injunction to halt Gibbons' steamboat operations. _Gibbons v. Ogden,_ 22 U.S.
(9 Wheat.) 1, 6 L.Ed. 23 (1824). In my view, Congress has the power to define
injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a case or
controversy where none existed before, and I do not read the Court's opinion
to suggest a contrary view. See _Warth v. Seldin,_ 422 U.S. 490, 500, 95 S.Ct.
2197, 2205, 45 L.Ed.2d 343 (1975); _ante,_ at 578. In exercising this power,
however, Congress must at the very least identify the injury it seeks to
vindicate and relate the injury to the class of persons entitled to bring
suit. The citizen-suit provision of the Endangered Species Act does not meet
these minimal requirements, because while the statute purports to confer a
right on "any person . . . to enjoin . . . the United States and any other
governmental instrumentality or agency . . . who is alleged to be in violation
of any provision of this chapter," it does not of its own force establish that
there is an injury in "any person" by virtue of any "violation." 16 U.S.C. §
1540(g)(1)(A).

40

The Court's holding that there is an outer limit to the power of Congress to
confer rights of action is a direct and necessary consequence of the case and
controversy limitations found in Article III. I agree that it would exceed
those limitations if, at the behest of Congress and in the absence of any
showing of concrete injury, we were to entertain citizen-suits to vindicate
the public's nonconcrete interest in the proper administration of the laws.
While it does not matter how many persons have been injured by the challenged
action, the party bringing suit must show that the action injures him in a
concrete and personal way. This requirement is not just an empty formality. It
preserves the vitality of the adversarial process by assuring both that the
parties before the court have an actual, as opposed to professed, stake in the
outcome, and that "the legal questions presented . . . will be resolved, not
in the rarefied atmosphere of a debating society, but in a concrete factual
context conducive to a realistic appreciation of the consequences of judicial
action." _Valley Forge Christian College v. Americans United for Separation of
Church and State, Inc.,_ 454 U.S. 464, 472, 102 S.Ct. 752, 758, 70 L.Ed.2d 700
(1982). In addition, the requirement of concrete injury confines the Judicial
Branch to its proper, limited role in the constitutional framework of
government.

41

An independent judiciary is held to account through its open proceedings and
its reasoned judgments. In this process it is essential for the public to know
what persons or groups are invoking the judicial power, the reasons that they
have brought suit, and whether their claims are vindicated or denied. The
concrete injury requirement helps assure that there can be an answer to these
questions; and, as the Court's opinion is careful to show, that is part of the
constitutional design.

42

With these observations, I concur in Parts I, II, III-A, and IV of the Court's
opinion and in the judgment of the Court.

43

Justice STEVENS, concurring in the judgment.

44

Because I am not persuaded that Congress intended the consultation requirement
in § 7(a)(2) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (ESA), 16 U.S.C. §
1536(a)(2), to apply to activities in foreign countries, I concur in the
judgment of reversal. I do not, however, agree with the Court's conclusion
that respondents lack standing because the threatened injury to their interest
in protecting the environment and studying endangered species is not
"imminent." Nor do I agree with the plurality's additional conclusion that
respondents' injury is not "redressable" in this litigation.

45

* In my opinion a person who has visited the critical habitat of an endangered species, has a professional interest in preserving the species and its habitat, and intends to revisit them in the future has standing to challenge agency action that threatens their destruction. Congress has found that a wide variety of endangered species of fish, wildlife, and plants are of "aesthetic, ecological, educational, historical, recreational, and scientific value to the Nation and its people." 16 U.S.C. § 1531(a)(3). Given that finding, we have no license to demean the importance of the interest that particular individuals may have in observing any species or its habitat, whether those individuals are motivated by aesthetic enjoyment, an interest in professional research, or an economic interest in preservation of the species. Indeed, this Court has often held that injuries to such interests are sufficient to confer standing,1 and the Court reiterates that holding today. See _ante,_ at 562-563.

46

The Court nevertheless concludes that respondents have not suffered "injury in
fact" because they have not shown that the harm to the endangered species will
produce "imminent" injury to them. See _ante,_ at 564. I disagree. An injury
to an individual's interest in studying or enjoying a species and its natural
habitat occurs when someone (whether it be the government or a private party)
takes action that harms that species and habitat. In my judgment, therefore,
the "imminence" of such an injury should be measured by the timing and
likelihood of the threatened environmental harm, rather than--as the Court
seems to suggest, _ante,_ at 564, and n. 2 by the time that might elapse
between the present and the time when the individuals would visit the area if
no such injury should occur.

47

To understand why this approach is correct and consistent with our precedent,
it is necessary to consider the purpose of the standing doctrine. Concerned
about "the proper--and properly limited--role of the courts in a democratic
society," we have long held that "Art. III judicial power exists only to
redress or otherwise to protect against injury to the complaining party."
_Warth v. Seldin,_ 422 U.S. 490, 498-499, 95 S.Ct. 2197, 2205, 45 L.Ed.2d 343
(1975). The plaintiff must have a "personal stake in the outcome" sufficient
to "assure that concrete adverseness which sharpens the presentation of issues
upon which the court so largely depends for illumination of difficult . . .
questions." _Baker v. Carr,_ 369 U.S. 186, 204, 82 S.Ct. 691, 703, 7 L.Ed.2d
663 (1962). For that reason, "[a]bstract injury is not enough. It must be
alleged that the plaintiff 'has sustained or is immediately in danger of
sustaining some direct injury' as the result of the challenged statute or
official conduct. . . . The injury or threat of injury must be both 'real and
immediate,' not 'conjectural,' or 'hypothetical.' " _O'Shea v. Littleton,_ 414
U.S. 488, 494, 94 S.Ct. 669, 675, 38 L.Ed.2d 674 (1974) (quoting _Golden v.
Zwickler,_ 394 U.S. 103, 109-110, 89 S.Ct. 956, 960, 22 L.Ed.2d 113 (1969)).

48

Consequently, we have denied standing to plaintiffs whose likelihood of
suffering any concrete adverse effect from the challenged action was
speculative. See, _e.g., Whitmore v. Arkansas,_ 495 U.S. 149, 158-159, 110
S.Ct. 1717, 1724-1725, 109 L.Ed.2d 135 (1990); _Los Angeles v. Lyons,_ 461
U.S. 95, 105, 103 S.Ct. 1660, 1665, 75 L.Ed.2d 675 (1983); _O'Shea,_ 414 U.S.,
at 497, 94 S.Ct., at 676. In this case, however, the likelihood that
respondents will be injured by the destruction of the endangered species is
not speculative. If respondents are genuinely interested in the preservation
of the endangered species and intend to study or observe these animals in the
future, their injury will occur as soon as the animals are destroyed. Thus the
only potential source of "speculation" in this case is whether respondents'
intent to study or observe the animals is genuine.2 In my view, Joyce Kelly
and Amy Skilbred have introduced sufficient evidence to negate petitioner's
contention that their claims of injury are "speculative" or "conjectural." As
Justice Blackmun explains, _post,_ at 591-592, a reasonable finder of fact
could conclude, from their past visits, their professional backgrounds, and
their affidavits and deposition testimony, that Ms. Kelly and Ms. Skilbred
will return to the project sites and, consequently, will be injured by the
destruction of the endangered species and critical habitat.

49

The plurality also concludes that respondents' injuries are not redressable in
this litigation for two reasons. First, respondents have sought only a
declaratory judgment that the Secretary of the Interior's regulation
interpreting § 7(a)(2) to require consultation only for agency actions in the
United States or on the high seas is invalid and an injunction requiring him
to promulgate a new regulation requiring consultation for agency actions
abroad as well. But, the plurality opines, even if respondents succeed and a
new regulation is promulgated, there is no guarantee that federal agencies
that are not parties to this case will actually consult with the Secretary.
See _Ante,_ at 568-571. Furthermore, the plurality continues, respondents have
not demonstrated that federal agencies can influence the behavior of the
foreign governments where the affected projects are located. Thus, even if the
agencies consult with the Secretary and terminate funding for foreign
projects, the foreign governments might nonetheless pursue the projects and
jeopardize the endangered species. See _Ante,_ at 571. Neither of these
reasons is persuasive.

50

We must presume that if this Court holds that § 7(a)(2) requires consultation,
all affected agencies would abide by that interpretation and engage in the
requisite consultations. Certainly the Executive Branch cannot be heard to
argue that an authoritative construction of the governing statute by this
Court may simply be ignored by any agency head. Moreover, if Congress has
required consultation between agencies, we must presume that such consultation
will have a serious purpose that is likely to produce tangible results. As
Justice Blackmun explains, _post,_ at 599-601, it is not mere speculation to
think that foreign governments, when faced with the threatened withdrawal of
United States assistance, will modify their projects to mitigate the harm to
endangered species.

II

51

Although I believe that respondents have standing, I nevertheless concur in
the judgment of reversal because I am persuaded that the Government is correct
in its submission that § 7(a)(2) does not apply to activities in foreign
countries. As with all questions of statutory construction, the question
whether a statute applies extraterritorially is one of congressional intent.
_Foley Bros., Inc. v. Filardo,_ 336 U.S. 281, 284-285, 69 S.Ct. 575, 577, 93
L.Ed. 680 (1949). We normally assume that "Congress is primarily concerned
with domestic conditions," _id.,_ at 285, 69 S.Ct., at 577, and therefore
presume that " 'legislation of Congress, unless a contrary intent appears, is
meant to apply only within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States.'
" _EEOC v. Arabian American Oil Co.,_ 499 U.S. ----, 111 S.Ct. 1227, 113
L.Ed.2d 274 (1991) (quoting _Foley Bros.,_ 336 U.S., at 285, 69 S.Ct., at
577).

52

Section 7(a)(2) provides, in relevant part:

53

"Each Federal agency shall, in consultation with and with the assistance of
the Secretary [of the Interior or Commerce, as appropriate3], insure that any
action authorized, funded, or carried out by such agency (hereinafter in this
section referred to as an 'agency action') is not likely to jeopardize the
continued existence of any endangered species or threatened species or result
in the destruction or adverse modification of habitat of such species which is
determined by the Secretary, after consultation as appropriate with affected
States, to be critical, unless such agency has been granted an exemption for
such action by the Committee pursuant to subsection (h) of this section. . .
." 16 U.S.C. § 1536(a)(2).

54

Nothing in this text indicates that the section applies in foreign countries.4
Indeed, the only geographic reference in the section is in the "critical
habitat" clause,5 which mentions "affected States." The Secretary of the
Interior and the Secretary of Commerce have consistently taken the position
that they need not designate critical habitat in foreign countries. See 42
Fed.Reg. 4869 (1977) (initial regulations of the Fish and Wildlife Service and
the National Marine Fisheries Service on behalf of the Secretary of Interior
and the Secretary of Commerce). Consequently, neither Secretary interprets §
7(a)(2) to require federal agencies to engage in consultations to insure that
their actions in foreign countries will not adversely affect the critical
habitat of endangered or threatened species.

55

That interpretation is sound, and, in fact, the Court of Appeals did not
question it.6 There is, moreover, no indication that Congress intended to give
a different geographic scope to the two clauses in § 7(a)(2). To the contrary,
Congress recognized that one of the "major causes" of extinction of endangered
species is the "destruction of natural habitat." S.Rep. No. 93-307, p. 2
(1973); see also, H.Rep. No. 93-412, p. 2 (1973), U.S.Code Cong. & Admin.News
1973, pp. 2989, 2990; _TVA v. Hill,_ 437 U.S. 153, 179, 98 S.Ct. 2279, 2294,
57 L.Ed.2d 117 (1978). It would thus be illogical to conclude that Congress
required federal agencies to avoid jeopardy to endangered species abroad, but
not destruction of critical habitat abroad.

56

The lack of an express indication that the consultation requirement applies
extraterritorially is particularly significant because other sections of the
ESA expressly deal with the problem of protecting endangered species abroad.
Section 8, for example, authorizes the President to provide assistance to "any
foreign country (with its consent) . . . in the development and management of
programs in that country which [are] . . . necessary or useful for the
conservation of any endangered species or threatened species listed by the
Secretary pursuant to section 1533 of this title." 16 U.S.C. § 1537(a). It
also directs the Secretary of Interior, "through the Secretary of State," to
"encourage" foreign countries to conserve fish and wildlife and to enter into
bilateral or multilateral agreements. § 1537(b). Section 9 makes it unlawful
to import endangered species into (or export them from) the United States or
to otherwise traffic in endangered species "in interstate or foreign
commerce." §§ 1538(a)(1)(A), (E), (F). Congress thus obviously thought about
endangered species abroad and devised specific sections of the ESA to protect
them. In this context, the absence of any explicit statement that the
consultation requirement is applicable to agency actions in foreign countries
suggests that Congress did not intend that § 7(a)(2) apply extraterritorially.

57

Finally, the general purpose of the ESA does not evince a congressional intent
that the consultation requirement be applicable to federal agency actions
abroad. The congressional findings explaining the need for the ESA emphasize
that "various species of fish, wildlife, and plants _in the United States_
have been rendered extinct as a consequence of economic growth and development
untempered by adequate concern and conservation," and that these species "are
of aesthetic, ecological, educational, historical, recreational, and
scientific value to the _Nation and its people._ " §§ 1531(1), (3) (emphasis
added). The lack of similar findings about the harm caused by development in
other countries suggests that Congress was primarily concerned with balancing
development and conservation goals in this country.7

58

In short, a reading of the entire statute persuades me that Congress did not
intend the consultation requirement in § 7(a)(2) to apply to activities in
foreign countries. Accordingly, notwithstanding my disagreement with the
Court's disposition of the standing question, I concur in its judgment.

59

Justice BLACKMUN, with whom Justice O'CONNOR joins, dissenting.

60

I part company with the Court in this case in two respects. First, I believe
that respondents have raised genuine issues of fact--sufficient to survive
summary judgment--both as to injury and as to redressability. Second, I
question the Court's breadth of language in rejecting standing for
"procedural" injuries. I fear the Court seeks to impose fresh limitations on
the constitutional authority of Congress to allow citizen-suits in the federal
courts for injuries deemed "procedural" in nature. I dissent.

61

* Article III of the Constitution confines the federal courts to adjudication of actual "cases" and "controversies." To ensure the presence of a "case" or "controversy," this Court has held that Article III requires, as an irreducible minimum, that a plaintiff allege (1) an injury that is (2) "fairly traceable to the defendant's allegedly unlawful conduct" and that is (3) "likely to be redressed by the requested relief." _Allen v. Wright,_ 468 U.S. 737, 751, 104 S.Ct. 3315, 3324, 82 L.Ed.2d 556 (1984).

A.

62

To survive petitioner's motion for summary judgment on standing, respondents
need not prove that they are actually or imminently harmed. They need show
only a "genuine issue" of material fact as to standing. Fed.Rule Civ.Proc.
56(c). This is not a heavy burden. A "genuine issue" exists so long as "the
evidence is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the
nonmoving party [respondents]." _Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc.,_ 477 U.S.
242, 248, 106 S.Ct. 2505, 2510, 91 L.Ed.2d 202 (1986). This Court's "function
is not [it]self to weigh the evidence and determine the truth of the matter
but to determine whether there is a genuine issue for trial." _Id.,_ at 249,
106 S.Ct., at 2511.

63

The Court never mentions the "genuine issue" standard. Rather, the Court
refers to the type of evidence it feels respondents failed to produce, namely,
"affidavits or other evidence showing, through specific facts" the existence
of injury. _Ante,_ at 563. The Court thereby confuses respondents' evidentiary
burden ( _i.e.,_ affidavits asserting "specific facts") in withstanding a
summary judgment motion under Rule 56(e) with the standard of proof ( _i.e.,_
the existence of a "genuine issue" of "material fact") under Rule 56(c).

64

* Were the Court to apply the proper standard for summary judgment, I believe it would conclude that the sworn affidavits and deposition testimony of Joyce Kelly and Amy Skilbred advance sufficient facts to create a genuine issue for trial concerning whether one or both would be imminently harmed by the Aswan and Mahaweli projects. In the first instance, as the Court itself concedes, the affidavits contained facts making it at least "questionable" (and therefore within the province of the factfinder) that certain agency-funded projects threaten listed species.1 _Ante,_ at 564. The only remaining issue, then, is whether Kelly and Skilbred have shown that they personally would suffer imminent harm.

65

I think a reasonable finder of fact could conclude from the information in the
affidavits and deposition testimony that either Kelly or Skilbred will soon
return to the project sites, thereby satisfying the "actual or imminent"
injury standard. The Court dismisses Kelly's and Skilbred's general statements
that they intended to revisit the project sites as "simply not enough."
_Ante,_ at 564. But those statements did not stand alone. A reasonable finder
of fact could conclude, based not only upon their statements of intent to
return, but upon their past visits to the project sites, as well as their
professional backgrounds, that it was likely that Kelly and Skilbred would
make a return trip to the project areas. Contrary to the Court's contention
that Kelly's and Skilbred's past visits "proves nothing," _ante,_ at 564, the
fact of their past visits could demonstrate to a reasonable factfinder that
Kelly and Skilbred have the requisite resources and personal interest in the
preservation of the species endangered by the Aswan and Mahaweli projects to
make good on their intention to return again. Cf. _Los Angeles v. Lyons,_ 461
U.S. 95, 102, 103 S.Ct. 1660, 1665, 75 L.Ed.2d 675 (1983) ("Past wrongs were
evidence bearing on whether there is a real and immediate threat of repeated
injury") (internal quotations omitted). Similarly, Kelly's and Skilbred's
professional backgrounds in wildlife preservation, see App. 100, 144, 309-310,
also make it likely--at least far more likely than for the average citizen--
that they would choose to visit these areas of the world where species are
vanishing.

66

By requiring a "description of concrete plans" or "specification of _when_ the
some day [for a return visit] will be," _ante,_ at 8, the Court, in my view,
demands what is likely an empty formality. No substantial barriers prevent
Kelly or Skilbred from simply purchasing plane tickets to return to the Aswan
and Mahaweli projects. This case differs from other cases in which the
imminence of harm turned largely on the affirmative actions of third parties
beyond a plaintiff's control. See _Whitmore v. Arkansas,_ 495 U.S. 149, --- -
---, 110 S.Ct. 1717, ---- - ----, 109 L.Ed.2d 135 (1990) (harm to plaintiff
death-row inmate from fellow inmate's execution depended on the court's one
day reversing plaintiff's conviction or sentence and considering comparable
sentences at resentencing); _Los Angeles v. Lyons,_ 461 U.S., at 105, 103
S.Ct., at 1667 (harm dependent on police's arresting plaintiff again and
subjecting him to chokehold); _Rizzo v. Goode,_ 423 U.S. 362, 372, 96 S.Ct.
598, 605, 46 L.Ed.2d 561 (1976) (harm rested upon "what one of a small unnamed
minority of policemen might do to them in the future because of that unknown
policeman's perception of departmental disciplinary procedures"); _O'Shea v.
Littleton,_ 414 U.S. 488, 495-498, 94 S.Ct. 669, 675-677, 38 L.Ed.2d 674
(1974) (harm from discriminatory conduct of county magistrate and judge
dependent on plaintiffs' being arrested, tried, convicted, and sentenced);
_Golden v. Zwickler,_ 394 U.S. 103, 109, 89 S.Ct. 956, 960, 22 L.Ed.2d 113
(1969) (harm to plaintiff dependent on a former Congressman's (then serving a
14-year term as a judge) running again for Congress). To be sure, a
plaintiff's unilateral control over his or her exposure to harm does not
_necessarily_ render the harm non-speculative. Nevertheless, it suggests that
a finder of fact would be far more likely to conclude the harm is actual or
imminent, especially if given an opportunity to hear testimony and determine
credibility.

67

I fear the Court's demand for detailed descriptions of future conduct will do
little to weed out those who are genuinely harmed from those who are not. More
likely, it will resurrect a code-pleading formalism in federal court summary
judgment practice, as federal courts, newly doubting their jurisdiction, will
demand more and more particularized showings of future harm. Just to survive
summary judgment, for example, a property owner claiming a decline in the
value of his property from governmental action might have to specify the exact
date he intends to sell his property and show that there is a market for the
property, lest it be surmised he might not sell again. A nurse turned down for
a job on grounds of her race had better be prepared to show on what date she
was prepared to start work, that she had arranged daycare for her child, and
that she would not have accepted work at another hospital instead. And a
Federal Tort Claims Act plaintiff alleging loss of consortium should make sure
to furnish this Court with a "description of concrete plans" for her nightly
schedule of attempted activities.

2

68

The Court also concludes that injury is lacking, because respondents'
allegations of "ecosystem nexus" failed to demonstrate sufficient proximity to
the site of the environmental harm. _Ante,_ at 565-566. To support that
conclusion, the Court mischaracterizes our decision in _Lujan v. National
Wildlife Federation,_ 497 U.S. 871, 110 S.Ct. 3177, 111 L.Ed.2d 695 (1990), as
establishing a general rule that "a plaintiff claiming injury from
environmental damage must use the area affected by the challenged activity."
_Ante,_ at 565-566. In _National Wildlife Federation,_ the Court required
specific geographical proximity because of the particular type of harm alleged
in that case: harm to the plaintiff's visual enjoyment of nature from mining
activities. _Id._ 497 U.S., at ----, 110 S.Ct., at ----. One cannot suffer
from the sight of a ruined landscape without being close enough to see the
sites actually being mined. Many environmental injuries, however, cause harm
distant from the area immediately affected by the challenged action.
Environmental destruction may affect animals traveling over vast geographical
ranges, see, _e.g., Japan Whaling Assn. v. American Cetacean Soc.,_ 478 U.S.
221, 106 S.Ct. 2860, 92 L.Ed.2d 166 (1986) (harm to American whale watchers
from Japanese whaling activities), or rivers running long geographical
courses, see, _e.g., Arkansas v. Oklahoma,_ \--- U.S. ----, 112 S.Ct. 1046,
117 L.Ed.2d 239 (1992) (harm to Oklahoma residents from wastewater treatment
plant 39 miles from border). It cannot seriously be contended that a
litigant's failure to use the precise or exact site where animals are
slaughtered or where toxic waste is dumped into a river means he or she cannot
show injury.

69

The Court also rejects respondents' claim of vocational or professional
injury. The Court says that it is "beyond all reason" that a zoo "keeper" of
Asian elephants would have standing to contest his government's participation
in the eradication of all the Asian elephants in another part of the world.
_Ante,_ at 566. I am unable to see how the distant location of the destruction
_necessarily_ (for purposes of ruling at summary judgment) mitigates the harm
to the elephant keeper. If there is no more access to a future supply of the
animal that sustains a keeper's livelihood, surely there is harm.

70

I have difficulty imagining this Court applying its rigid principles of
geographic formalism anywhere outside the context of environmental claims. As
I understand it, environmental plaintiffs are under no special constitutional
standing disabilities. Like other plaintiffs, they need show only that the
action they challenge has injured them, without necessarily showing they
happened to be physically near the location of the alleged wrong. The Court's
decision today should not be interpreted "to foreclose the possibility . . .
that in different circumstances a nexus theory similar to those proffered here
might support a claim to standing." _Ante,_ at 579 (Kennedy, J., concurring in
part and concurring in the judgment).

B

71

A plurality of the Court suggests that respondents have not demonstrated
redressability: a likelihood that a court ruling in their favor would remedy
their injury. _Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental Study Group, Inc.,_
438 U.S. 59, 74-75, and n. 20, 98 S.Ct. 2620, 2630-2631, and n. 20, 57 L.Ed.2d
595 (1978) (plaintiff must show "substantial likelihood" that relief requested
will redress the injury). The plurality identifies two obstacles. The first is
that the "action agencies" ( _e.g.,_ the Agency for International Development)
cannot be required to undertake consultation with petitioner Secretary,
because they are not directly bound as parties to the suit and are otherwise
not indirectly bound by being subject to petitioner Secretary's regulation.
Petitioner, however, officially and publicly has taken the position that his
regulations regarding consultation under § 7 of the Act are binding on action
agencies. 50 CFR § 402.14(a) (1991).2 And he has previously taken the same
position in this very litigation, having stated in his answer to the complaint
that petitioner "admits the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) was designated the
lead agency for the formulation of regulations concerning section 7 of the
ESA." App. 246. I cannot agree with the plurality that the Secretary (or the
Solicitor General) is now free, for the convenience of this appeal, to disavow
his prior public and litigation positions. More generally, I cannot agree that
the Government is free to play "Three-Card Monte" with its description of
agencies' authority to defeat standing against the agency given the lead in
administering a statutory scheme.

72

Emphasizing that none of the action agencies are parties to this suit (and
having rejected the possibility of their being indirectly bound by
petitioner's regulation), the plurality concludes that "there is no reason
they should be obliged to honor an incidental legal determination the suit
produced." _Ante,_ at 569. I am not as willing as the plurality is to assume
that agencies at least will not try to follow the law. Moreover, I wonder if
the plurality has not overlooked the extensive involvement from the inception
of this litigation by the Department of State and the Agency for International
Development.3 Under principles of collateral estoppel, these agencies are
precluded from subsequently relitigating the issues decided in this suit.

73

"[O]ne who prosecutes or defends a suit in the name of another to establish
and protect his own right, or who assists in the prosecution or defense of an
action in aid of some interest of his own, and who does this openly to the
knowledge of the opposing party, is as much bound by the judgment and as fully
entitled to avail himself of it as an estoppel against an adverse party, as he
would be if he had been a party to the record." _Souffront v. Compagnie des
Sucreries,_ 217 U.S. 475, 487, 30 S.Ct. 608, 612, 54 L.Ed. 846 (1910).

74

This principle applies even to the Federal Government. In _Montana v. United
States,_ 440 U.S. 147, 99 S.Ct. 970, 59 L.Ed.2d 210 (1979), this Court held
that the Government was estopped from relitigating in federal court the
constitutionality of Montana's gross receipts tax, because that issue
previously had been litigated in state court by an individual contractor whose
litigation had been financed and controlled by the Federal Government. "Thus,
although not a party, the United States plainly had a sufficient 'laboring
oar' in the conduct of the state-court litigation to actuate principles of
estoppel." _Id.,_ at 155, 99 S.Ct., at 974. See also _United States v.
Mendoza,_ 464 U.S. 154, 164, n. 9, 104 S.Ct. 568, 574, n. 9, 78 L.Ed.2d 379
(1984) (Federal Government estopped where it "constituted a 'party' in all but
a technical sense"). In my view, the action agencies have had sufficient
"laboring oars" in this litigation since its inception to be bound from
subsequent relitigation of the extraterritorial scope of the § 7 consultation
requirement.4 As a result, I believe respondents' injury would likely be
redressed by a favorable decision.

75

The second redressability obstacle relied on by the plurality is that "the
[action] agencies generally supply only a fraction of the funding for a
foreign project." _Ante,_ at 571. What this Court might "generally" take to be
true does not eliminate the existence of a genuine issue of fact to withstand
summary judgment. Even if the action agencies supply only a fraction of the
funding for a particular foreign project, it remains at least a question for
the finder of fact whether threatened withdrawal of that fraction would affect
foreign government conduct sufficiently to avoid harm to listed species.

76

The plurality states that "AID, for example, has provided less than 10% of the
funding for the Mahaweli project." _Ante,_ at 571. The plurality neglects to
mention that this "fraction" amounts to $170 million, see App. 159, not so
paltry a sum for a country of only 16 million people with a gross national
product of less than $6 billion in 1986 when respondents filed the complaint
in this action. Federal Research Division, Library of Congress, Sri Lanka: A
Country Study (Area Handbook Series) xvi-xvii (1990).

77

The plurality flatly states: "Respondents have produced nothing to indicate
that the projects they have named will . . . do less harm to listed species,
if that fraction is eliminated." _Ante,_ at 571. As an initial matter, the
relevant inquiry is not, as the plurality suggests, what will happen if AID or
other agencies stop funding projects, but what will happen if AID or other
agencies comply with the consultation requirement for projects abroad.
Respondents filed suit to require consultation, not a termination of funding.
Respondents have raised at least a genuine issue of fact that the projects
harm endangered species and that the actions of AID and other U.S. agencies
can mitigate that harm.

78

The plurality overlooks an Interior Department memorandum listing eight
endangered or threatened species in the Mahaweli project area and recounting
that "[t]he Sri Lankan government has requested the assistance of AID in
mitigating the negative impacts to the wildlife involved." App. 78. Further, a
letter from the Director of the Fish and Wildlife Service to AID states:

79

"The Sri Lanka government lacks the necessary finances to undertake any long-
term management programs to avoid the negative impacts to the wildlife. The
donor nations and agencies that are financing the [Mahaweli project] will be
the key as to how successfully the wildlife is preserved. If wildlife problems
receive the same level of attention as the engineering project, then the
negative impacts to the environment can be alleviated. This means that there
has to be long-term funding in sufficient amounts to stem the negative impacts
of this project." _Id.,_ at 216.

80

I do not share the plurality's astonishing confidence that, on the record
here, a factfinder could only conclude that AID was powerless to ensure the
protection of listed species at the Mahaweli project.

81

As for the Aswan project, the record again rebuts the plurality's assumption
that donor agencies are without any authority to protect listed species. Kelly
asserted in her affidavit--and it has not been disputed--that the Bureau of
Reclamation was "overseeing" the rehabilitation of the Aswan project. App.
101. See also _id.,_ at 65 (Bureau of Reclamation publication stating: "In
1982, the Egyptian government . . . requested that Reclamation serve as its
engineering advisor for the nine-year [Aswan] rehabilitation project").

82

I find myself unable to agree with the plurality's analysis of redressability,
based as it is on its invitation of executive lawlessness, ignorance of
principles of collateral estoppel, unfounded assumptions about causation, and
erroneous conclusions about what the record does not say. In my view,
respondents have satisfactorily shown a genuine issue of fact as to whether
their injury would likely be redressed by a decision in their favor.

II

83

The Court concludes that any "procedural injury" suffered by respondents is
insufficient to confer standing. It rejects the view that the "injury-in-fact
requirement . . . [is] satisfied by congressional conferral upon _all_ person
of an abstract, self-contained, noninstrumental 'right' to have the Executive
observe the procedures required by law." _Ante,_ at 573. Whatever the Court
might mean with that very broad language, it cannot be saying that "procedural
injuries" _as a class_ are necessarily insufficient for purposes of Article
III standing.

84

Most governmental conduct can be classified as "procedural." Many injuries
caused by governmental conduct, therefore, are categorizable at some level of
generality as "procedural" injuries. Yet, these injuries are not categorically
beyond the pale of redress by the federal courts. When the Government, for
example, "procedurally" issues a pollution permit, those affected by the
permittee's pollutants are not without standing to sue. Only later cases will
tell just what the Court means by its intimation that "procedural" injuries
are not constitutionally cognizable injuries. In the meantime, I have the
greatest of sympathy for the courts across the country that will struggle to
understand the Court's standardless exposition of this concept today.

85

The Court expresses concern that allowing judicial enforcement of "agencies'
observance of a particular, statutorily prescribed procedure" would "transfer
from the President to the courts the Chief Executive's most important
constitutional duty, to 'take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed,' Art.
II, sec. 3." _Ante,_ at 576,577. In fact, the principal effect of foreclosing
judicial enforcement of such procedures is to transfer power into the hands of
the Executive at the expense--not of the courts--but of Congress, from which
that power originates and emanates.

86

Under the Court's anachronistically formal view of the separation of powers,
Congress legislates pure, substantive mandates and has no business structuring
the procedural manner in which the Executive implements these mandates. To be
sure, in the ordinary course, Congress does legislate in black-and-white terms
of affirmative commands or negative prohibitions on the conduct of officers of
the Executive Branch. In complex regulatory areas, however, Congress often
legislates, as it were, in procedural shades of gray. That is, it sets forth
substantive policy goals and provides for their attainment by requiring
Executive Branch officials to follow certain procedures, for example, in the
form of reporting, consultation, and certification requirements.

87

The Court recently has considered two such procedurally oriented statutes. In
_Japan Whaling Assn. v. American Cetacean Society,_ 478 U.S. 221, 106 S.Ct.
2860, 92 L.Ed.2d 166 (1986), the Court examined a statute requiring the
Secretary of Commerce to certify to the President that foreign nations were
not conducting fishing operations or trading which "diminis[h] the
effectiveness" of an international whaling convention. _Id.,_ at 226, 106
S.Ct., at 2864. The Court expressly found standing to sue. _Id.,_ at 230-231,
n. 4, 106 S.Ct., at 2865-2866, n. 4. In _Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens
Council,_ 490 U.S. 332, 348, 109 S.Ct. 1835, 1844, 104 L.Ed.2d 351 (1989),
this Court considered injury from violation of the "action-forcing" procedures
of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), in particular the
requirements for issuance of environmental impact statements.

88

The consultation requirement of § 7 of the Endangered Species Act is a
similar, action-forcing statute. Consultation is designed as an integral check
on federal agency action, ensuring that such action does not go forward
without full consideration of its effects on listed species. Once consultation
is initiated, the Secretary is under a duty to provide to the action agency "a
written statement setting forth the Secretary's opinion, and a summary of the
information on which the opinion is based, detailing how the agency action
affects the species or its critical habitat." 16 U.S.C. § 1536(b)(3)(A). The
Secretary is also obligated to suggest "reasonable and prudent alternatives"
to prevent jeopardy to listed species. _Ibid._ The action agency must
undertake as well its own "biological assessment for the purpose of
identifying any endangered species or threatened species" likely to be
affected by agency action. § 1536(c)(1). After the initiation of consultation,
the action agency "shall not make any irreversible or irretrievable commitment
of resources" which would foreclose the "formulation or implementation of any
reasonable and prudent alternative measures" to avoid jeopardizing listed
species. § 1536(d). These action-forcing procedures are "designed to protect
some threatened concrete interest," _ante,_ at 573, n. 8, of persons who
observe and work with endangered or threatened species. That is why I am
mystified by the Court's unsupported conclusion that "[t]his is not a case
where plaintiffs are seeking to enforce a procedural requirement the disregard
of which could impair a separate concrete interest of theirs." _Ante,_ at 572.

89

Congress legislates in procedural shades of gray not to aggrandize its own
power but to allow maximum Executive discretion in the attainment of Congress'
legislative goals. Congress could simply impose a substantive prohibition on
executive conduct; it could say that no agency action shall result in the loss
of more than 5% of any listed species. Instead, Congress sets forth
substantive guidelines and allows the Executive, within certain procedural
constraints, to decide how best to effectuate the ultimate goal. See _American
Power & Light Co. v. SEC,_ 329 U.S. 90, 105, 67 S.Ct. 133, 142, 91 L.Ed. 103
(1946). The Court never has questioned Congress' authority to impose such
procedural constraints on executive power. Just as Congress does not violate
separation of powers by structuring the procedural manner in which the
Executive shall carry out the laws, surely the federal courts do not violate
separation of powers when, at the very instruction and command of Congress,
they enforce these procedures.

90

To prevent Congress from conferring standing for "procedural injuries" is
another way of saying that Congress may not delegate to the courts authority
deemed "executive" in nature. _Ante,_ at 577 (Congress may not "transfer from
the President to the courts the Chief Executive's most important
constitutional duty, to 'take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed,' Art.
II, sec. 3"). Here Congress seeks not to delegate "executive" power but only
to strengthen the procedures it has legislatively mandated. "We have long
recognized that the nondelegation doctrine does not prevent Congress from
seeking assistance, within proper limits, from its coordinate Branches."
_Touby v. United States,_ \--- U.S. ----, ----, 111 S.Ct. 1752, 1756, 114
L.Ed.2d 219 (1991). "Congress does not violate the Constitution merely because
it legislates in broad terms, leaving a certain degree of discretion to
executive _or judicial actors._ " (emphasis added). _Ibid._ Ironically, this
Court has previously justified a relaxed review of congressional delegation to
the Executive on grounds that Congress, in turn, has subjected the exercise of
that power to judicial review. _INS v. Chadha,_ 462 U.S. 919, 953-954, n. 16,
103 S.Ct. 2764, 2785-2786, n. 16, 77 L.Ed.2d 317 (1983); _American Power &
Light Co. v. SEC,_ 329 U.S., at 105-106, 67 S.Ct. at 142-143. The Court's
intimation today that procedural injuries are not constitutionally cognizable
threatens this understanding upon which Congress has undoubtedly relied. In no
sense is the Court's suggestion compelled by our "common understanding of what
activities are appropriate to legislatures, to executives, and to courts."
_Ante,_ at 560. In my view, it reflects an unseemly solicitude for an
expansion of power of the Executive Branch.

91

It is to be hoped that over time the Court will acknowledge that some classes
of procedural duties are so enmeshed with the prevention of a substantive,
concrete harm that an individual plaintiff may be able to demonstrate a
sufficient likelihood of injury just through the breach of that procedural
duty. For example, in the context of the NEPA requirement of environmental-
impact statements, this Court has acknowledged "it is now well settled that
NEPA itself does not mandate particular results [and] simply prescribes the
necessary process," but " _these procedures are almost certain to affect the
agency's substantive decision." Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens Council,_
490 U.S., 332, 350, 109 S.Ct. 1835, 1846, 104 L.Ed.2d 351 (1989) (emphasis
added). See also _Andrus v. Sierra Club,_ 442 U.S. 347, 350-351, 99 S.Ct.
2335, 2337, 60 L.Ed.2d 943 (1979) ("If environmental concerns are not
interwoven into the fabric of agency planning, the 'action-forcing'
characteristics of [the environmental-impact statement requirement] would be
lost"). This acknowledgement of an inextricable link between procedural and
substantive harm does not reflect improper appellate factfinding. It reflects
nothing more than the proper deference owed to the judgment of a coordinate
branch--Congress--that certain procedures are directly tied to protection
against a substantive harm.

92

In short, determining "injury" for Article III standing purposes is a fact-
specific inquiry. "Typically . . . the standing inquiry requires careful
judicial examination of a complaint's allegations to ascertain whether the
particular plaintiff is entitled to an adjudication of the particular claims
asserted." _Allen v. Wright,_ 468 U.S., at 752, 104 S.Ct., at 3325. There may
be factual circumstances in which a congressionally imposed procedural
requirement is so insubstantially connected to the prevention of a substantive
harm that it cannot be said to work any conceivable injury to an individual
litigant. But, as a general matter, the courts owe substantial deference to
Congress' substantive purpose in imposing a certain procedural requirement. In
all events, "[o]ur separation-of-powers analysis does not turn on the labeling
of an activity as 'substantive' as opposed to 'procedural.' " _Mistretta v.
United States,_ 488 U.S. 361, 393, 109 S.Ct. 647, 665, 102 L.Ed.2d 714 (1989).
There is no room for a _per se_ rule or presumption excluding injuries labeled
"procedural" in nature.

III

93

In conclusion, I cannot join the Court on what amounts to a slash-and-burn
expedition through the law of environmental standing. In my view, "[t]he very
essence of civil liberty certainly consists in the right of every individual
to claim the protection of the laws, whenever he receives an injury." _Marbury
v. Madison,_ 1 Cranch 137, 163, 2 L.Ed. 60 (1803).

94

I dissent.

1

By particularized, we mean that the injury must affect the plaintiff in a
personal and individual way.

2

The dissent acknowledges the settled requirement that the injury complained of
be, if not actual, then at least _imminent_ --but it contends that respondents
could get past summary judgment because "a reasonable finder of fact could
conclude . . . that . . . Kelly or Skilbred will soon return to the project
sites." _Post,_ at 591. This analysis suffers either from a factual or from a
legal defect, depending on what the "soon" is supposed to mean. If "soon"
refers to the standard mandated by our precedents--that the injury be
"imminent," _Whitmore v. Arkansas,_ 495 U.S. 149, 155, 110 S.Ct. 1717, 1723,
109 L.Ed.2d 135 (1990)--we are at a loss to see how, as a factual matter, the
standard can be met by respondents' mere profession of an intent, some day, to
return. But if, as we suspect, "soon" means nothing more than "in this
lifetime," then the dissent has undertaken quite a departure from our
precedents. Although "imminence" is concededly a somewhat elastic concept, it
cannot be stretched beyond its purpose, which is to insure that the alleged
injury is not too speculative for Article III purposes--that the injury is "
_certainly_ impending," _id.,_ at 158, 110 S.Ct., at 1725 (emphasis added). It
has been stretched beyond the breaking point when, as here, the plaintiff
alleges only an injury at some indefinite future time, and the acts necessary
to make the injury happen are at least partly within the plaintiff's own
control. In such circumstances we have insisted that the injury proceed with a
high degree of immediacy, so as to reduce the possibility of deciding a case
in which no injury would have occurred at all. See, _e.g., id.,_ at 156-160,
110 S.Ct., at 1723-1726; _Los Angeles v. Lyons,_ 461 U.S. 95, 102-106, 103
S.Ct. 1660, 1665-1667, 75 L.Ed.2d 675 (1983).

There is no substance to the dissent's suggestion that imminence is demanded
only when the alleged harm depends upon "the affirmative actions of third
parties beyond a plaintiff's control," _post,_ at 592. Our cases _mention_
third-party-caused contingency, naturally enough; but they also mention the
plaintiff's failure to show that he will soon expose _himself_ to the injury,
see, _e.g., Lyons, supra,_ at 105-106, 103 S.Ct., at 1666-1667; _O'Shea v.
Littleton,_ 414 U.S. 488, 497, 94 S.Ct. 669, 676, 38 L.Ed.2d 674 (1974);
_Ashcroft v. Mattis,_ 431 U.S. 171, 172-173, n. 2, 97 S.Ct. 1739, 1740 n. 2,
52 L.Ed.2d 219 (1977) ( _per curiam_ ). And there is certainly no reason in
principle to demand evidence that third persons will take the action exposing
the plaintiff to harm, while _presuming_ that the plaintiff himself will do
so.

Our insistence upon these established requirements of standing does not mean
that we would, as the dissent contends, "demand . . . detailed descriptions"
of damages, such as a "nightly schedule of attempted activities" from
plaintiffs alleging loss of consortium. _Post,_ at 593. That case and the
others posited by the dissent all involve _actual_ harm; the existence of
standing is clear, though the precise extent of harm remains to be determined
at trial. Where there is no actual harm, however, its imminence (though not
its precise extent) must be established.

3

The dissent embraces each of respondents' "nexus" theories, rejecting this
portion of our analysis because it is "unable to see how the distant location
of the destruction _necessarily_ (for purposes of ruling at summary judgment)
mitigates the harm" to the plaintiff. _Post,_ at 594-595. But summary judgment
must be entered "against a party who fails to make a showing sufficient to
establish the existence of an element essential to that party's case, and on
which that party will bear the burden of proof at trial." _Celotex Corp. v.
Catrett,_ 477 U.S. 317, 322, 106 S.Ct. 2548, 2552, 91 L.Ed.2d 265 (1986).
Respondent had to adduce facts, therefore, on the basis of which it could
reasonably be found that concrete injury to its members was, as our cases
require, "certainly impending." The dissent may be correct that the geographic
remoteness of those members (here in the United States) from Sri Lanka and
Aswan does not " _necessarily_ " prevent such a finding--but it assuredly does
so when no further facts have been brought forward (and respondent has
produced none) showing that the impact upon animals in those distant places
will in some fashion be reflected here. The dissent's position to the contrary
reduces to the notion that distance _never_ prevents harm, a proposition we
categorically reject. It cannot be that a person with an interest in an animal
automatically has standing to enjoin federal threats to that species of
animal, anywhere in the world. Were that the case, the plaintiff in _Sierra
Club,_ for example, could have avoided the necessity of establishing anyone's
use of Mineral King by merely identifying one of its members interested in an
endangered species of flora or fauna at that location. Justice Blackmun's
accusation that a special rule is being crafted for "environmental claims,"
_post,_ at 2154, is correct, but _he_ is the craftsman.

Justice Stevens, by contrast, would allow standing on an apparent "animal
nexus" theory to all plaintiffs whose interest in the animals is "genuine."
Such plaintiffs, we are told, do not have to visit the animals because the
animals are analogous to family members. _Post,_ at 2148-2149, and n. 2. We
decline to join JUSTICE STEVENS in this Linnaean leap. It is unclear to us
what constitutes a "genuine" interest; how it differs from a "non-genuine"
interest (which nonetheless prompted a plaintiff to file suit); and why such
an interest in animals should be different from such an interest in anything
else that is the subject of a lawsuit.

4

We need not linger over the dissent's facially impracticable suggestion,
_post,_ at 596-595, that one agency of the government can acquire the power to
direct other agencies by simply claiming that power in its own regulations and
in litigation to which the other agencies are not parties. As for the
contention that the other agencies will be "collaterally estopped" to
challenge our judgment that they are bound by the Secretary of Interior's
views, because of their participation in this suit, _post,_ at 596-597:
Whether or not that is true now, it was assuredly not true when this suit was
filed, naming the Secretary alone. "The existence of federal jurisdiction
ordinarily depends on the facts _as they exist when the complaint is filed._ "
_Newman-Green, Inc. v. Alfonzo-Larrain,_ 490 U.S., 826, 830, 109 S.Ct. 2218,
2222, 104 L.Ed.2d 893 (1989) (emphasis added). It cannot be that, by later
participating in the suit, the State Department and AID retroactively created
a redressability (and hence a jurisdiction) that did not exist at the outset.

The dissent's rejoinder that redressability _was_ clear at the outset because
the _Secretary_ thought the regulation binding on the agencies, _post,_ at
598-599, n. 4, continues to miss the point: the _agencies_ did not _agree_
with the Secretary, nor would they be bound by a district court holding (as to
this issue) in the Secretary's favor. There is no support for the dissent's
novel contention, _ibid.,_ that Rule 19 of the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure, governing joinder of indispensable parties, somehow alters our
longstanding rule that jurisdiction is to be assessed under the facts existing
when the complaint is filed. The redressability element of the Article III
standing requirement and the " _complete_ relief" referred to by Rule 19 are
not identical. Finally, we reach the dissent's contention, _post,_ at 599, n.
4, that by refusing to waive our settled rule for purposes of this case we
have made "federal subject matter jurisdiction . . . a one-way street running
the Executive Branch's way." That is so, we are told, because the Executive
can dispel jurisdiction where it previously existed (by either conceding the
merits or by pointing out that nonparty agencies would not be bound by a
ruling), whereas a plaintiff cannot retroactively create jurisdiction based on
postcomplaint litigation conduct. But _any_ defendant, not just the
government, can dispel jurisdiction by conceding the merits (and presumably
thereby suffering a judgment) or by demonstrating standing defects. And
permitting a defendant to point out a pre-existing standing defect late in the
day is not remotely comparable to permitting a plaintiff to _establish_
standing on the basis of the defendant's litigation conduct occurring after
standing is erroneously determined.

5

Seizing on the fortuity that the case has made its way to _this_ Court,
Justice Stevens protests that no agency would ignore "an authoritative
construction of the [ESA] by this Court." _Post,_ at 585. In that he is
probably correct; in concluding from it that plaintiffs have demonstrated
redressability, he is not. Since, as we have pointed out above, standing is to
be determined as of the commencement of suit; since at that point it could
certainly not be known that the suit would reach this Court; and since it is
not likely that an agency would feel compelled to accede to the legal view of
a district court expressed in a case to which it was not a party;
redressability clearly did not exist.

6

The dissent criticizes us for "overlook[ing]" memoranda indicating that the
Sri Lankan government solicited and required AID's assistance to mitigate the
effects of the Mahaweli Project on endangered species, and that the Bureau of
Reclamation was advising the Aswan Project. _Post,_ at 600-601. The memoranda,
however, contain no indication whatever that the projects will cease or be
less harmful to listed species in the absence of AID funding. In fact, the Sri
Lanka memorandum suggests just the opposite: it states that AID's role will be
to _mitigate_ the " 'negative impacts to the wildlife,' " _post,_ at 600,
which means that the termination of AID funding would _exacerbate_
respondent's claimed injury.

7

There is this much truth to the assertion that "procedural rights" are
special: The person who has been accorded a procedural right to protect his
concrete interests can assert that right without meeting all the normal
standards for redressability and immediacy. Thus, under our case-law, one
living adjacent to the site for proposed construction of a federally licensed
dam has standing to challenge the licensing agency's failure to prepare an
Environmental Impact Statement, even though he cannot establish with any
certainty that the Statement will cause the license to be withheld or altered,
and even though the dam will not be completed for many years. (That is why we
do not rely, in the present case, upon the Government's argument that, _even
if_ the other agencies were obliged to consult with the Secretary, they might
not have followed his advice.) What respondents' "procedural rights" argument
seeks, however, is quite different from this: standing for persons who have no
concrete interests affected--persons who live (and propose to live) at the
other end of the country from the dam.

8

The dissent's discussion of this aspect of the case, _post,_ at 601-606,
distorts our opinion. We do _not_ hold that an individual cannot enforce
procedural rights; he assuredly can, so long as the procedures in question are
designed to protect some threatened concrete interest of his that is the
ultimate basis of his standing. The dissent, however, asserts that there exist
"classes of procedural duties . . . so enmeshed with the prevention of a
substantive, concrete harm that an individual plaintiff may be able to
demonstrate a sufficient likelihood of injury just through the breach of that
procedural duty," _post,_ at 605. If we understand this correctly, it means
that the government's violation of a certain (undescribed) class of procedural
duty satisfies the concrete-injury requirement by itself, without any showing
that the procedural violation endangers a concrete interest of the plaintiff
(apart from his interest in having the procedure observed). We cannot agree.
The dissent is unable to cite a single case in which we actually found
standing solely on the basis of a "procedural right" unconnected to the
plaintiff's own concrete harm. Its suggestion that we did so in _Japan Whaling
Association, supra,_ and _Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens Council,_ 490
U.S. 332, 109 S.Ct. 1835, 104 L.Ed.2d 351 (1989), _post,_ at 602-603 is not
supported by the facts. In the former case, we found that the environmental
organizations had standing because the "whale watching and studying of their
members w[ould] be adversely affected by continued whale harvesting," see 478
U.S., at 230-231, n. 4, 106 S.Ct., at 2866, n. 4; and in the latter we did not
so much as mention standing, for the very good reason that the plaintiff was a
citizens' council for the area in which the challenged construction was to
occur, so that its members would obviously be concretely affected, see _Methow
Valley Citizens Council v. Regional Forester,_ 833 F.2d 810, 812-813 (CA9
1987).

1

See, _e.g., Sierra Club v. Morton,_ 405 U.S. 727, 734, 92 S.Ct. 1361, 1365, 31
L.Ed.2d 636 (1972); _United States v. Students Challenging Regulatory Agency
Procedures (SCRAP),_ 412 U.S. 669, 686-687, 93 S.Ct. 2405, 2415-2416, 37
L.Ed.2d 254 (1973); _Japan Whaling Assn. v. American Cetacean Society,_ 478
U.S. 221, 230-231, n. 4, 106 S.Ct. 2860, 2866, n. 4, 92 L.Ed.2d 166 (1986).

2

As we recognized in _Sierra Club v. Morton,_ 405 U.S., at 735, 92 S.Ct. at
1366, the impact of changes in the aesthetics or ecology of a particular area
does "not fall indiscriminately upon every citizen. The alleged injury will be
felt directly only by those who use [the area,] and for whom the aesthetic and
recreational values of the area will be lessened. . . ." Thus, respondents
would not be injured by the challenged projects if they had not visited the
sites or studied the threatened species and habitat. But, as discussed above,
respondents did visit the sites; moreover, they have expressed an intent to do
so again. This intent to revisit the area is significant evidence tending to
confirm the genuine character of respondents' interest, but I am not at all
sure that an intent to revisit would be indispensable in every case. The
interest that confers standing in a case of this kind is comparable, though by
no means equivalent, to the interest in a relationship among family members
that can be immediately harmed by the death of an absent member, regardless of
when, if ever, a family reunion is planned to occur. Thus, if the facts of
this case had shown repeated and regular visits by the respondents, cf.
_ante,_ at 579 (Opinion of Kennedy, J.), proof of an intent to revisit might
well be superfluous.

3

The ESA defines "Secretary" to mean "the Secretary of the Interior or the
Secretary of Commerce as program responsibilities are vested pursuant to the
provisions of Reorganization Plan Numbered 4 of 1970." 16 U.S.C. § 1532(15).
As a general matter, "marine species are under the jurisdiction of the
Secretary of Commerce and all other species are under the jurisdiction of the
Secretary of the Interior." 51 Fed.Reg. 19926 (1986) (preamble to final
regulations governing interagency consultation promulgated by the Fish and
Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service on behalf of the
Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Commerce).

4

Respondents point out that the duties in § 7(a)(2) are phrased in broad,
inclusive language: "Each Federal agency" shall consult with the Secretary and
insure that "any action" does not jeopardize "any endangered or threatened
species" or destroy or adversely modify the "habitat of such species." See
Brief for Respondents 36; 16 U.S.C. § 1536(a)(2). The Court of Appeals
correctly recognized, however, that such inclusive language, by itself, is not
sufficient to overcome the presumption against the extraterritorial
application of statutes. 911 F.2d 117, 122 (CA8 1990); see also _Foley Bros.,
Inc. v. Filardo,_ 336 U.S. 281, 282, 287-288, 69 S.Ct. 575, 578-579, 93 L.Ed.
680 (1949) (statute requiring an eight-hour day provision in " '[e]very
contract made to which the United States . . . is a party' " is inapplicable
to contracts for work performed in foreign countries).

5

Section 7(a)(2) has two clauses which require federal agencies to consult with
the Secretary to insure that their actions (1) do not jeopardize threatened or
endangered species (the "endangered species clause"), and (2) are not likely
to destroy or adversely affect the habitat of such species (the "critical
habitat clause").

6

Instead, the Court of Appeals concluded that the endangered species clause and
the critical habitat clause are "severable," at least with respect to their
"geographical scope," so that the former clause applies extraterritorially
even if the latter does not. 911 F.2d, at 125. Under this interpretation,
federal agencies must consult with the Secretary to insure that their actions
in foreign countries are not likely to threaten any endangered species, but
they need not consult to insure that their actions are not likely to destroy
the critical habitats of these species. I cannot subscribe to the Court of
Appeals' strained interpretation, for there is no indication that Congress
intended to give such vastly different scope to the two clauses in § 7(a)(2).

7

Of course, Congress also found that "the United States has pledged itself as a
sovereign state in the international community to conserve to the extent
practicable the various species of fish or wildlife and plants facing
extinction, pursuant to [several international agreements]," and that
"encouraging the States . . . to develop and maintain conservation programs
which meet national and international standards is a key to meeting the
Nation's international commitments. . . ." 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531(4), (5). The
Court of Appeals read these findings as indicative of a congressional intent
to make § 7(a)(2)'s consultation requirement applicable to agency action
abroad. See 911 F.2d, at 122-123. I am not persuaded, however, that such a
broad congressional intent can be gleaned from these findings. Instead, I
think the findings indicate a more narrow congressional intent that the United
States abide by its international commitments.

1

The record is replete with genuine issues of fact about the harm to endangered
species from the Aswan and Mahaweli projects. For example, according to an
internal memorandum of the Fish and Wildlife Service, no fewer than eight
listed species are found in the Mahaweli project area (Indian elephant,
leopard, purple-faced languar, toque macaque, red face malkoha, Bengal
monitor, mugger crocodile, and python). App. 78. The memorandum recounts that
the Sri Lankan government has specifically requested assistance from the
Agency for International Development in "mitigating the negative impacts to
the wildlife involved." _Ibid._ In addition, a letter from the Director of the
Fish and Wildlife Service to AID warns: "The magnitude of the Accelerated
Mahaweli Development Program could have massive environmental impacts on such
an insular ecosystem as the Mahaweli River system." _Id.,_ at 215. It adds:
"The Sri Lankan government lacks the necessary finances to undertake any long-
term management programs to avoid the negative impacts to the wildlife."
_Id.,_ at 216. Finally, in an affidavit submitted by petitioner for purposes
of this litigation, an AID official states that an AID environmental
assessment "showed that the [Mahaweli project] could affect several endangered
species." _Id.,_ at 159.

2

This section provides in part:

"(a) _Requirement for formal consultation._ Each Federal agency shall review
its actions at the earliest possible time to determine whether any action may
affect listed species or critical habitat. If such a determination is made,
formal consultation is required,. . . ."

The Secretary's intent to make the regulations binding upon other agencies is
even clearer from the discussion accompanying promulgation of the consultation
rules. See 51 Fed.Reg. 19928 (1986) ("Several commenters stated that Congress
did not intend that the Service interpret or implement section 7, and believed
that the Service should recast the regulations as 'nonbinding guidelines' that
would govern only the Service's role in consultation . . . The Service is
satisfied that it has ample authority and legislative mandate to issue this
rule, and believes that uniform consultation standards and procedures are
necessary to meet its obligations under section 7.")

3

For example, petitioner's motion before the District Court to dismiss the
complaint identified four attorneys from the Department of State and AID (an
agency of the Department of State) as "counsel" to the attorneys from the
Justice Department in this action. One AID lawyer actually entered a formal
appearance before the District Court on behalf of AID. On at least one
occasion petitioner requested an extension of time to file a brief,
representing that "[a]n extension is necessary for the Department of Justice
to consult with . . . the Department of State [on] the brief." See Brief for
Respondents 31, n. 8. In addition, AID officials have offered testimony in
this action.

4

The plurality now suggests that collateral estoppel principles can have no
application here, because the participation of other agencies in this
litigation arose _after_ its inception. Borrowing a principle from this
Court's statutory diversity jurisdiction cases and transferring it to the
constitutional standing context, the Court observes: "The existence of federal
jurisdiction ordinarily depends on the facts _as they exist when the complaint
is filed_ " (emphasis in original). _Ante,_ at 569, n. 4 (quoting _Newman-
Green, Inc., v. Alfonzo-Larrain,_ 490 U.S. 826, 830, 109 S.Ct. 2218, 2222, 104
L.Ed.2d 893 (1989) ). See also _Mollan v. Torrance,_ 9 Wheat. 537, 539, 6
L.Ed. 154 (1824) (Marshall, C.J.). The plurality proclaims that "it cannot be"
that later participation of other agencies in this suit retroactively created
a jurisdictional issue that did not exist at the outset. _Ante,_ at 570, n. 4.

The plurality, however, overlooks at least three difficulties with this
explanation. In the first place, assuming that the plurality were correct that
events as of the initiation of the lawsuit are the only proper jurisdictional
reference point, were the Court to follow this rule in this case there would
be no question as to the compliance of other agencies, because, as stated at
an earlier point in the opinion: "When the Secretary promulgated the
regulation here, he thought it was binding on the agencies." _Ante,_ at 569.
This suit was commenced in October 1986, just three months after the
regulation took effect. App. 21; 51 Fed.Reg. 19926 (1986). As the plurality
further admits, questions about compliance of other agencies with the
Secretary's regulation arose only by later participation of the Solicitor
General and other agencies in the suit. _Ante,_ at 569. Thus, it was, to
borrow the plurality's own words, "assuredly not true when this suit was
filed, naming the Secretary alone," _ante,_ at 569, n. 4, that there was any
question before the District Court about other agencies being bound.

Second, were the plurality correct that, for purposes of determining
redressability, a court may look only to facts as they exist when the
complaint is filed, then the Court by implication would render a nullity part
of Rule 19 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Rule 19 provides in part
for the joinder of persons if "in the person's absence complete relief cannot
be accorded among those already parties." This presupposes nonredressability
at the outset of the litigation. Under the plurality's rationale, a district
court would have no authority to join indispensable parties, because it would,
as an initial matter, have no jurisdiction for lack of the power to provide
redress at the outset of the litigation.

Third, the rule articulated in _Newman-Green_ is that the existence of federal
jurisdiction " _ordinarily_ " depends on the facts at the initiation of the
lawsuit. This is no ironclad _per se_ rule without exceptions. Had the
Solicitor General, for example, taken a position during this appeal that the §
7 consultation requirement does in fact apply extraterritorially, the
controversy would be moot, and this Court would be without jurisdiction.

In the plurality's view, federal subject matter jurisdiction appears to be a
one-way street running the Executive Branch's way. When the Executive Branch
wants to dispel jurisdiction over an action against an agency, it is free to
raise at any point in the litigation that other nonparty agencies might not be
bound by any determinations of the one agency defendant. When a plaintiff,
however, seeks to preserve jurisdiction in the face of a claim of
nonredressability, the plaintiff is not free to point to the involvement of
nonparty agencies in subsequent parts of the litigation. The plurality does
not explain why the street runs only one way--why some actions of the
Executive Branch subsequent to initiation of a lawsuit are cognizable for
jurisdictional purposes but others simply are not.

More troubling still is the distance this one-way street carries the plurality
from the underlying purpose of the standing doctrine. The purpose of the
standing doctrine is to ensure that courts do not render advisory opinions
rather than resolve genuine controversies between adverse parties. Under the
plurality's analysis, the federal courts are to ignore their _present_ ability
to resolve a concrete controversy if at some distant point in the past it
could be said that redress could not have been provided. The plurality
perverts the standing inquiry.

