**127 S.Ct. 1438 (2007)**

# MASSACHUSETTS et al., Petitioners,  
v.  
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY et al.

No. 05-1120.

**Supreme Court of United States.**

Argued November 29, 2006. Decided April 2, 2007.

*1444 James R. Milkey, Boston, MA, for petitioners.

Gregory G. Garre, Washington, D.C., for respondents.

Thomas F. Reilly, Attorney General of Massachusetts, Lisa Heinzerling, Special
Assistant Attorney General, Washington, D.C., James R. Milkey, Counsel of
Record, William L. Pardee, Carol Iancu, Assistant Attorneys General, Boston,
MA, Bill Lockyer, Attorney General of California, Marc N. Melnick, Nicholas
Stern, Deputy Attorneys General, Oakland, CA, Richard Blumenthal, Attorney
General of Connecticut, Kimberly Massicotte, Matthew Levin, Assistant
Attorneys General, Hartford, CT, Lisa Madigan, Attorney General of Illinois,
Matthew J. Dunn, Gerald T. Karr, Assistant Attorneys General, Chicago, IL, G.
Steven Rowe, Attorney General of Maine, Gerald D. Reid, Assistant Attorney
General, Augusta, ME, Stuart Rabner, Attorney General of New Jersey, Stefanie
A. Brand, Kevin P. Auerbacher, Lisa Morelli, Deputy Attorneys General,
Trenton, NJ, Patricia A. Madrid, Attorney General of New Mexico, Stuart M.
Bluestone, Deputy Attorney General, Stephen R. Ferris, Judith Ann Moore,
Assistant Attorneys General, Sante Fe, NM, Eliot Spitzer, Attorney General of
New York, Caitlin J. Halligan, Solicitor General, J. Jared Snyder, Assistant
Attorneys General, New York, NY, Hardy Myers Attorney General of Oregon,
Philip Schradle, Special Counsel to the Attorney General, Richard Whitman,
Assistant Attorney General, Oregon Dept. of Justice, Salem, OR, Patrick C.
Lynch, Attorney General of Rhode Island, Tricia K. Jedele, Special Assistant
Attorney General, Providence, RI, William H. Sorrell, Attorney *1445 General
of Vermont, Kevin O. Leske, Assistant Attorney General, Montpelier, VT, Rob
McKenna, Attorney General of Washington, Leslie R. Seffern, Assistant Attorney
General, Jay D. Geck, Deputy Solicitor General, Olympia, WA, Robert J.
Spagnoletti, Attorney General of the District of Columbia, Todd S. Kim,
Solicitor General, Donna Murasky, Senior Assistant Attorney General, South
Washington, D.C., Malaetasi M. Togafau, Attorney General of American Samoa,
Pago Pago, American Samoa, Michael Cardozo, Corporation Counsel, City of New
York, Susan Kath Scott Pasternack, Tracy Triplett, Assistant Corporation
Counsel, New York, NY, Ralph S. Tyler, City Solicitor, City of Baltimore,
William Phelan, Jr., Principal Counsel, Baltimore City Dept. of Law,
Baltimore, MD, Julie Teel, San Diego, CA, Counsel for Center for Biological
Diversity, Joseph Mendelson III, Washington, DC, Counsel for International
Center for Technology Assessment, Center for Food Safety, Environmental
Advocates, and Greenpeace, Seth Kaplan, Boston, MA, Counsel for Conservation
Law Foundation, James B. Tripp, New York, NY, Counsel for Environmental
Defense, Brian Dunkiel, Shems Dunkiel Kassel & Saunders PLLC, Burlington,
Vermont, Danielle Fugere, San Francisco, CA, Counsel for Friends of the Earth,
John M. Stanton, Washington, DC, Counsel for National Environmental Trust,
David Doniger, Washington, DC, Counsel for Natural Resources Defense Council,
David Bookbinder, Washington, DC, Howard Fox, Washington, DC, Counsel for
Sierra Club, Alexandra Schulte, Washington, DC, Counsel for Union of Concerned
Scientists, Alex Fidis, Washington, DC, Counsel for U.S. Public Interest
Research Group, for Petitioners.

Kenneth W. Starr, Stuart A.C. Drake, Andrew B. Clubok, Ashley C. Parrish,
Derek S. Bentsen, Kirkland & Ellis LLP, Washington, D.C., Richard A. Cordray,
Grove City, Ohio, Theodore B. Olson, Counsel of Record, Miguel A. Estrada,
David Debold, Matthew D. McGill, Amir Tayrani, Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher LLP,
Washington, D.C., for Respondents.

Norman W. Fichthorn, Counsel of Record, Allison D. Wood, Hunton & Williams
LLP, Washington, D.C. for Respondent Utility Air Regulatory Group.

Russell S. Frye, FryeLaw PLLC, Washington, DC, Counsel of Record for
Intervenor-Respondent CO2 Litigation Group, Of Counsel: Dell E. Perelman, Vice
President and General Counsel, Leslie A. Hulse, Assistant General Counsel,
American Chemistry Council, Arlington, VA, Richard Wasserstrom, American
Forest & Paper Association, Washington, DC, Harry M. Ng, General Counsel,
Ralph J. Colleli, Jr., American Petroleum Institute, Washington, DC, Nick
Goldstein, Staff Attorney, American Road and Transportation Builders
Association, Washington, DC, Jan S. Amundson, Senior Vice President & General
Counsel, Quentin Riegel, Vice President, Litigation & Deputy General Counsel,
National Association of Manufacturers, Washington, DC, Robin S. Conrad,
National Chamber Litigation Center, Inc., Washington, DC, Bob Slaughter,
President & General Counsel, National Petrochemical & Refiners Association,
Washington, DC, John L. Wittenborn, Kelley Drye, Collier Shannon, Washington,
DC, for Respondent CO2 Litigation Group.

Roger R. Martella, Jr., Acting General Counsel, Carol S. Holmes, Attorney,
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C, Paul D. Clement, Solicitor
General, Counsel of Record, Sue Ellen Wooldridge, Assistant Attorney General,
Gregory G. Garre, Thomas G. Hungar, Deputy Solicitors General, Malcolm L.
Stewart, Assistant to the Solicitor General, Jon M. Lipshultz, *1446 Attorney,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C, for Federal Respondent.

Michael A. Cox, Michigan Attorney General, Thomas L. Casey, Michigan Solicitor
General, Counsel of Record, Lansing, MI, Alan F. Hoffman, Neil D. Gordon,
Assistant Attorneys General, for the State of Michigan, for the State of
Texas, Greg Abbott, Attorney General, Karen W. Kornell, Assistant Attorney
General, Chief, Natural Resources Division, Jane Atwood, Assistant Attorney
General, Austin, Texas, for the State of Ohio, Jim Petro, Attorney General,
Dale T. Vitale, Senior Deputy, Attorney General, Environmental Enforcement
Section, Columbus, Ohio, for respondent states of Michigan, North Dakota,
Utah, South Dakota, Alaska, Kansas, Nebraska, Texas, and Ohio.

Justice STEVENS delivered the opinion of the Court.

A well-documented rise in global temperatures has coincided with a significant
increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Respected
scientists believe the two trends are related. For when carbon dioxide is
released into the atmosphere, it acts like the ceiling of a greenhouse,
trapping solar energy and retarding the escape of reflected heat. It is
therefore a speciesthe most important speciesof a "greenhouse gas."

Calling global warming "the most pressing environmental challenge of our
time,"[1] a group of States,[2] local governments,[3] and private
organizations,[4] alleged in a petition for certiorari that the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) has abdicated its responsibility under the Clean Air
Act to regulate the emissions of four greenhouse gases, including carbon
dioxide. Specifically, petitioners asked us to answer two questions concerning
the meaning of § 202(a)(1) of the Act: whether EPA has the statutory authority
to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from new motor vehicles; and if so,
whether its stated reasons for refusing to do so are consistent with the
statute.

In response, EPA, supported by 10 intervening States[5] and six trade
associations,[6] correctly argued that we may not address those two questions
unless at least one petitioner has standing to invoke our jurisdiction under
Article III of the Constitution. *1447 Notwithstanding the serious character
of that jurisdictional argument and the absence of any conflicting decisions
construing § 202(a)(1), the unusual importance of the underlying issue
persuaded us to grant the writ. 548 U.S. ___, 126 S.Ct. 2960, 165 L.Ed.2d 949
(2006).

## I

Section 202(a)(1) of the Clean Air Act, as added by Pub.L. 89-272, § 101(8),
79 Stat. 992, and as amended by, _inter alia,_ 84 Stat. 1690 and 91 Stat. 791,
42 U.S.C. § 7521(a)(1), provides:

> "The [EPA] Administrator shall by regulation prescribe (and from time to
> time revise) in accordance with the provisions of this section, standards
> applicable to the emission of any air pollutant from any class or classes of
> new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines, which in his judgment
> cause, or contribute to, air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated
> to endanger public health or welfare ...."[7]

The Act defines "air pollutant" to include "any air pollution agent or
combination of such agents, including any physical, chemical, biological,
radioactive ... substance or matter which is emitted into or otherwise enters
the ambient air." § 7602(g). "Welfare" is also defined broadly: among other
things, it includes "effects on ... weather... and climate." § 7602(h).

When Congress enacted these provisions, the study of climate change was in its
infancy.[8] In 1959, shortly after the U.S. Weather Bureau began monitoring
atmospheric carbon dioxide levels, an observatory in Mauna Loa, Hawaii,
recorded a mean level of 316 parts per million. This was well above the
highest carbon dioxide concentrationno more than 300 parts per
millionrevealed in the 420,000-year-old ice-core record.[9] By the time
Congress drafted § 202(a)(1) in 1970, carbon dioxide levels had reached 325
parts per million.[10]

*1448 In the late 1970's, the Federal Government began devoting serious attention to the possibility that carbon dioxide emissions associated with human activity could provoke climate change. In 1978, Congress enacted the National Climate Program Act, 92 Stat. 601, which required the President to establish a program to "assist the Nation and the world to understand and respond to natural and man-induced climate processes and their implications," _id.,_ § 3. President Carter, in turn, asked the National Research Council, the working arm of the National Academy of Sciences, to investigate the subject. The Council's response was unequivocal: "If carbon dioxide continues to increase, the study group finds no reason to doubt that climate changes will result and no reason to believe that these changes will be negligible.... A wait-and-see policy may mean waiting until it is too late."[11]

Congress next addressed the issue in 1987, when it enacted the Global Climate
Protection Act, Title XI of Pub.L. 100-204, 101 Stat. 1407, note following 15
U.S.C. § 2901. Finding that "manmade pollutionthe release of carbon dioxide,
chlorofluorocarbons, methane, and other trace gases into the atmospheremay be
producing a long-term and substantial increase in the average temperature on
Earth," § 1102(1), 101 Stat. 1408, Congress directed EPA to propose to
Congress a "coordinated national policy on global climate change," § 1103(b),
and ordered the Secretary of State to work "through the channels of
multilateral diplomacy" and coordinate diplomatic efforts to combat global
warming, § 1103(c). Congress emphasized that "ongoing pollution and
deforestation may be contributing now to an irreversible process" and that
"[n]ecessary actions must be identified and implemented in time to protect the
climate." § 1102(4).

Meanwhile, the scientific understanding of climate change progressed. In 1990,
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a multinational
scientific body organized under the auspices of the United Nations, published
its first comprehensive report on the topic. Drawing on expert opinions from
across the globe, the IPCC concluded that "emissions resulting from human
activities are substantially increasing the atmospheric concentrations of...
greenhouse gases [which] will enhance the greenhouse effect, resulting on
average in an additional warming of the Earth's surface."[12]

Responding to the IPCC report, the United Nations convened the "Earth Summit"
in 1992 in Rio de Janeiro. The first President Bush attended and signed the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), a nonbinding
agreement among 154 nations to reduce atmospheric concentrations of carbon
dioxide and other greenhouse gases for the purpose of "prevent[ing] dangerous
anthropogenic [ _i.e.,_ human-induced] interference with the [Earth's] climate
system."[13] S. Treaty Doc. No. 102-38, Art. 2, p. 5 (1992). The Senate
unanimously ratified the treaty.

*1449 Some five years laterafter the IPCC issued a second comprehensive report in 1995 concluding that "[t]he balance of evidence suggests there is a discernible human influence on global climate"[14]the UNFCCC signatories met in Kyoto, Japan, and adopted a protocol that assigned mandatory targets for industrialized nations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Because those targets did not apply to developing and heavily polluting nations such as China and India, the Senate unanimously passed a resolution expressing its sense that the United States should not enter into the Kyoto Protocol. See S. Res. 98, 105th Cong., 1st Sess. (July 25, 1997) (as passed). President Clinton did not submit the protocol to the Senate for ratification.

## II

On October 20, 1999, a group of 19 private organizations[15] filed a
rulemaking petition asking EPA to regulate "greenhouse gas emissions from new
motor vehicles under § 202 of the Clean Air Act." App. 5. Petitioners
maintained that 1998 was the "warmest year on record"; that carbon dioxide,
methane, nitrous oxide, and hydrofluorocarbons are "heat trapping greenhouse
gases"; that greenhouse gas emissions have significantly accelerated climate
change; and that the IPCC's 1995 report warned that "carbon dioxide remains
the most important contributor to [man-made] forcing of climate change."
_Id.,_ at 13 (internal quotation marks omitted). The petition further alleged
that climate change will have serious adverse effects on human health and the
environment. _Id.,_ at 22-35. As to EPA's statutory authority, the petition
observed that the agency itself had already confirmed that it had the power to
regulate carbon dioxide. See _id.,_ at 18, n. 21. In 1998, Jonathan Z. Cannon,
then EPA's General Counsel, prepared a legal opinion concluding that "CO2
emissions are within the scope of EPA's authority to regulate," even as he
recognized that EPA had so far declined to exercise that authority. _Id.,_ at
54 (memorandum to Carol M. Browner, Administrator (Apr. 10, 1998) (hereinafter
Cannon memorandum)). Cannon's successor, Gary S. Guzy, reiterated that opinion
before a congressional committee just two weeks before the rulemaking petition
was filed. See _id.,_ at 61.

Fifteen months after the petition's submission, EPA requested public comment
on "all the issues raised in [the] petition," adding a "particular" request
for comments on "any scientific, technical, legal, economic or other aspect of
these issues that may be relevant to EPA's consideration of this petition." 66
Fed.Reg. 7486, 7487 (2001). EPA received more than 50,000 comments over the
next five months. See 68 Fed.Reg. 52924 (2003).

Before the close of the comment period, the White House sought "assistance in
identifying the areas in the science of climate change where there are the
greatest certainties and uncertainties" from the National Research Council,
asking for a response "as soon as possible." App. 213. *1450 The result was a
2001 report titled Climate Change: An Analysis of Some Key Questions (NRC
Report), which, drawing heavily on the 1995 IPCC report, concluded that
"[g]reenhouse gases are accumulating in Earth's atmosphere as a result of
human activities, causing surface air temperatures and subsurface ocean
temperatures to rise. Temperatures are, in fact, rising." NRC Report 1.

On September 8, 2003, EPA entered an order denying the rulemaking petition. 68
Fed.Reg. 52922. The agency gave two reasons for its decision: (1) that
contrary to the opinions of its former general counsels, the Clean Air Act
does not authorize EPA to issue mandatory regulations to address global
climate change, see _id.,_ at 52925-52929; and (2) that even if the agency had
the authority to set greenhouse gas emission standards, it would be unwise to
do so at this time, _id.,_ at 52929-52931.

In concluding that it lacked statutory authority over greenhouse gases, EPA
observed that Congress "was well aware of the global climate change issue when
it last comprehensively amended the [Clean Air Act] in 1990," yet it declined
to adopt a proposed amendment establishing binding emissions limitations.
_Id.,_ at 52926. Congress instead chose to authorize further investigation
into climate change. _Ibid._ (citing §§ 103(g) and 602(e) of the Clean Air Act
Amendments of 1990, 104 Stat. 2652, 2703, 42 U.S.C. §§ 7403(g)(1) and
7671a(e)). EPA further reasoned that Congress' "specially tailored solutions
to global atmospheric issues," 68 Fed.Reg. 52926in particular, its 1990
enactment of a comprehensive scheme to regulate pollutants that depleted the
ozone layer, see Title VI, 104 Stat. 2649, 42 U.S.C. §§ 7671-7671qcounseled
against reading the general authorization of § 202(a)(1) to confer regulatory
authority over greenhouse gases.

EPA stated that it was "urged on in this view" by this Court's decision in
_FDA v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp.,_ 529 U.S. 120, 120 S.Ct. 1291, 146
L.Ed.2d 121 (2000). In that case, relying on "tobacco['s] unique political
history," _id.,_ at 159, 120 S.Ct. 1291, we invalidated the Food and Drug
Administration's reliance on its general authority to regulate drugs as a
basis for asserting jurisdiction over an "industry constituting a significant
portion of the American economy," _ibid._

EPA reasoned that climate change had its own "political history": Congress
designed the original Clean Air Act to address _local_ air pollutants rather
than a substance that "is fairly consistent in its concentration throughout
the _world's_ atmosphere," 68 Fed.Reg. 52927 (emphasis added); declined in
1990 to enact proposed amendments to force EPA to set carbon dioxide emission
standards for motor vehicles, _ibid._ (citing H.R. 5966, 101st Cong., 2d Sess.
(1990)); and addressed global climate change in other legislation, 68 Fed.
Reg. 52927. Because of this political history, and because imposing emission
limitations on greenhouse gases would have even greater economic and political
repercussions than regulating tobacco, EPA was persuaded that it lacked the
power to do so. _Id.,_ at 52928. In essence, EPA concluded that climate change
was so important that unless Congress spoke with exacting specificity, it
could not have meant the agency to address it.

Having reached that conclusion, EPA believed it followed that greenhouse gases
cannot be "air pollutants" within the meaning of the Act. See _ibid._ ("It
follows from this conclusion, that [greenhouse gases], as such, are not air
pollutants under the [Clean Air Act's] regulatory provisions..."). The agency
bolstered this conclusion *1451 by explaining that if carbon dioxide were an
air pollutant, the only feasible method of reducing tailpipe emissions would
be to improve fuel economy. But because Congress has already created detailed
mandatory fuel economy standards subject to Department of Transportation (DOT)
administration, the agency concluded that EPA regulation would either conflict
with those standards or be superfluous. _Id.,_ at 52929.

Even assuming that it had authority over greenhouse gases, EPA explained in
detail why it would refuse to exercise that authority. The agency began by
recognizing that the concentration of greenhouse gases has dramatically
increased as a result of human activities, and acknowledged the attendant
increase in global surface air temperatures. _Id.,_ at 52930. EPA nevertheless
gave controlling importance to the NRC Report's statement that a causal link
between the two "`cannot be unequivocally established.'" _Ibid._ (quoting NRC
Report 17). Given that residual uncertainty, EPA concluded that regulating
greenhouse gas emissions would be unwise. 68 Fed.Reg. 52930.

The agency furthermore characterized any EPA regulation of motor-vehicle
emissions as a "piecemeal approach" to climate change, _id.,_ at 52931, and
stated that such regulation would conflict with the President's "comprehensive
approach" to the problem, _id.,_ at 52932. That approach involves additional
support for technological innovation, the creation of nonregulatory programs
to encourage voluntary private-sector reductions in greenhouse gas emissions,
and further research on climate changenot actual regulation. _Id.,_ at
52932-52933. According to EPA, unilateral EPA regulation of motor-vehicle
greenhouse gas emissions might also hamper the President's ability to persuade
key developing countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. _Id.,_ at 52931.

## III

Petitioners, now joined by intervenor States and local governments, sought
review of EPA's order in the United States Court of Appeals for the District
of Columbia Circuit.[16] Although each of the three judges on the panel wrote
a separate opinion, two judges agreed "that the EPA Administrator properly
exercised his discretion under § 202(a)(1) in denying the petition for rule
making." 415 F.3d 50, 58 (2005). The court therefore denied the petition for
review.

In his opinion announcing the court's judgment, Judge Randolph avoided a
definitive ruling as to petitioners' standing, _id.,_ at 56, reasoning that it
was permissible to proceed to the merits because the standing and the merits
inquiries "overlap[ped]," _ibid._ Assuming without deciding that the statute
authorized the EPA Administrator to regulate greenhouse gas emissions that "in
his judgment" may "reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or
welfare," 42 U.S.C. § 7521(a)(1), Judge Randolph concluded that the exercise
of that judgment need not be based solely on scientific evidence, but may also
be informed by the sort of policy judgments that motivate congressional
action. 415 F.3d, at 58. Given that framework, it was reasonable for EPA to
base its decision on scientific uncertainty as well as on other factors,
including the concern that unilateral regulation of U.S. motor-vehicle
emissions could weaken efforts to reduce *1452 greenhouse gas emissions from
other countries. _Ibid._

Judge Sentelle wrote separately because he believed petitioners failed to
"demonstrat[e] the element of injury necessary to establish standing under
Article III." _Id.,_ at 59 (opinion dissenting in part and concurring in
judgment). In his view, they had alleged that global warming is "harmful to
humanity at large," but could not allege "particularized injuries" to
themselves. _Id.,_ at 60 (citing _Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife,_ 504 U.S.
555, 562, 112 S.Ct. 2130, 119 L.Ed.2d 351 (1992)). While he dissented on
standing, however, he accepted the contrary view as the law of the case and
joined Judge Randolph's judgment on the merits as the closest to that which he
preferred. 415 F.3d, at 60-61.

Judge Tatel dissented. Emphasizing that EPA nowhere challenged the factual
basis of petitioners' affidavits, _id.,_ at 66, he concluded that at least
Massachusetts had "satisfied each element of Article III standinginjury,
causation, and redressability," _id.,_ at 64. In Judge Tatel's view, the
"`substantial probability,'" _id.,_ at 66, that projected rises in sea level
would lead to serious loss of coastal property was a "far cry" from the kind
of generalized harm insufficient to ground Article III jurisdiction. _Id.,_ at
65. He found that petitioners' affidavits more than adequately supported the
conclusion that EPA's failure to curb greenhouse gas emissions contributed to
the sea level changes that threatened Massachusetts' coastal property. _Ibid._
As to redressability, he observed that one of petitioners' experts, a former
EPA climatologist, stated that "`[a]chievable reductions in emissions of CO2
and other [greenhouse gases] from U.S. motor vehicles would ... delay and
moderate many of the adverse impacts of global warming.'" _Ibid._ (quoting
declaration of Michael MacCracken, former Executive Director, U.S. Global
Change Research Program ¶ 5(e) (hereinafter MacCracken Decl.), available in 2
Petitioners' Standing Appendix in No. 03-1361, etc., (CADC), p. 209
(Stdg.App.)). He further noted that the one-time director of EPA's motor-
vehicle pollution control efforts stated in an affidavit that enforceable
emission standards would lead to the development of new technologies that
"`would gradually be mandated by other countries around the world.'" 415 F.3d,
at 66 (quoting declaration of Michael Walsh ¶¶ 7-8, 10, Stdg. App. 309-310,
311). On the merits, Judge Tatel explained at length why he believed the text
of the statute provided EPA with authority to regulate greenhouse gas
emissions, and why its policy concerns did not justify its refusal to exercise
that authority. 415 F.3d, at 67-82.

## IV

Article III of the Constitution limits federal-court jurisdiction to "Cases"
and "Controversies." Those two words confine "the business of federal courts
to questions presented in an adversary context and in a form historically
viewed as capable of resolution through the judicial process." _Flast v.
Cohen,_ 392 U.S. 83, 95, 88 S.Ct. 1942, 20 L.Ed.2d 947 (1968). It is therefore
familiar learning that no justiciable "controversy" exists when parties seek
adjudication of a political question, _Luther v. Borden,_ 7 How. 1, 12 L.Ed.
581 (1849), when they ask for an advisory opinion, _Hayburn's Case,_ 2 Dall.
409, 1 L.Ed. 436 (1792), see also _Clinton v. Jones,_ 520 U.S. 681, 700, n.
33, 117 S.Ct. 1636, 137 L.Ed.2d 945 (1997), or when the question sought to be
adjudicated has been mooted by subsequent developments, _California v. San
Pablo & Tulare R. Co.,_ 149 U.S. 308, 13 S.Ct. 876, 37 L.Ed. 747 (1893). This
case suffers from none of these defects.

*1453 The parties' dispute turns on the proper construction of a congressional statute, a question eminently suitable to resolution in federal court. Congress has moreover authorized this type of challenge to EPA action. See 42 U.S.C. § 7607(b)(1). That authorization is of critical importance to the standing inquiry: "Congress has the power to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a case or controversy where none existed before." _Lujan,_ 504 U.S., at 580, 112 S.Ct. 2130 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment). "In exercising this power, however, Congress must at the very least identify the injury it seeks to vindicate and relate the injury to the class of persons entitled to bring suit." _Ibid._ We will not, therefore, "entertain citizen suits to vindicate the public's nonconcrete interest in the proper administration of the laws." _Id.,_ at 581, 112 S.Ct. 2130.

EPA maintains that because greenhouse gas emissions inflict widespread harm,
the doctrine of standing presents an insuperable jurisdictional obstacle. We
do not agree. At bottom, "the gist of the question of standing" is whether
petitioners have "such a personal stake in the outcome of the controversy as
to assure that concrete adverseness which sharpens the presentation of issues
upon which the court so largely depends for illumination." _Baker v. Carr,_
369 U.S. 186, 204, 82 S.Ct. 691, 7 L.Ed.2d 663 (1962). As Justice KENNEDY
explained in his _Lujan_ concurrence:

> "While it does not matter how many persons have been injured by the
> challenged action, the party bringing suit must show that the action injures
> him in a concrete and personal way. This requirement is not just an empty
> formality. It preserves the vitality of the adversarial process by assuring
> both that the parties before the court have an actual, as opposed to
> professed, stake in the outcome, and that the legal questions presented ...
> will be resolved, not in the rarified atmosphere of a debating society, but
> in a concrete factual context conducive to a realistic appreciation of the
> consequences of judicial action." 504 U.S., at 581, 112 S.Ct. 2130 (internal
> quotation marks omitted).

To ensure the proper adversarial presentation, _Lujan_ holds that a litigant
must demonstrate that it has suffered a concrete and particularized injury
that is either actual or imminent, that the injury is fairly traceable to the
defendant, and that it is likely that a favorable decision will redress that
injury. See _id.,_ at 560-561, 112 S.Ct. 2130. However, a litigant to whom
Congress has "accorded a procedural right to protect his concrete interests,"
_id.,_ at 572, n. 7, 112 S.Ct. 2130here, the right to challenge agency action
unlawfully withheld, § 7607(b)(1)"can assert that right without meeting all
the normal standards for redressability and immediacy," _ibid._ When a
litigant is vested with a procedural right, that litigant has standing if
there is some possibility that the requested relief will prompt the injury-
causing party to reconsider the decision that allegedly harmed the litigant.
_Ibid.;_ see also _Sugar Cane Growers Cooperative of Fla. v. Veneman,_ 289
F.3d 89, 94-95 (C.A.D.C.2002) ("A [litigant] who alleges a deprivation of a
procedural protection to which he is entitled never has to prove that if he
had received the procedure the substantive result would have been altered. All
that is necessary is to show that the procedural step was connected to the
substantive result").

Only one of the petitioners needs to have standing to permit us to consider
the petition for review. See _Rumsfeld v. Forum for Academic and Institutional
Rights, Inc.,_ 547 U.S. 47, 52, n. 2, 126 S.Ct. *1454 1297, 164 L.Ed.2d 156
(2006). We stress here, as did Judge Tatel below, the special position and
interest of Massachusetts. It is of considerable relevance that the party
seeking review here is a sovereign State and not, as it was in _Lujan,_ a
private individual.

Well before the creation of the modern administrative state, we recognized
that States are not normal litigants for the purposes of invoking federal
jurisdiction. As Justice Holmes explained in _Georgia v. Tennessee Copper
Co.,_ 206 U.S. 230, 237, 27 S.Ct. 618, 51 L.Ed. 1038 (1907), a case in which
Georgia sought to protect its citizens from air pollution originating outside
its borders:

> "The case has been argued largely as if it were one between two private
> parties; but it is not. The very elements that would be relied upon in a
> suit between fellow-citizens as a ground for equitable relief are wanting
> here. The State owns very little of the territory alleged to be affected,
> and the damage to it capable of estimate in money, possibly, at least, is
> small. This is a suit by a State for an injury to it in its capacity of
> _quasi_ -sovereign. In that capacity the State has an interest independent
> of and behind the titles of its citizens, in all the earth and air within
> its domain. It has the last word as to whether its mountains shall be
> stripped of their forests and its inhabitants shall breathe pure air."

Just as Georgia's "independent interest... in all the earth and air within its
domain" supported federal jurisdiction a century ago, so too does
Massachusetts' well-founded desire to preserve its sovereign territory today.
Cf. _Alden v. Maine,_ 527 U.S. 706, 715, 119 S.Ct. 2240, 144 L.Ed.2d 636
(1999) (observing that in the federal system, the States "are not relegated to
the role of mere provinces or political corporations, but retain the dignity,
though not the full authority, of sovereignty"). That Massachusetts does in
fact own a great deal of the "territory alleged to be affected" only
reinforces the conclusion that its stake in the outcome of this case is
sufficiently concrete to warrant the exercise of federal judicial power.

When a State enters the Union, it surrenders certain sovereign prerogatives.
Massachusetts cannot invade Rhode Island to force reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions, it cannot negotiate an emissions treaty with China or India, and in
some circumstances the exercise of its police powers to reduce in-state motor-
vehicle emissions might well be pre-empted. See _Alfred L. Snapp & Son, Inc.
v. Puerto Rico ex rel. Barez,_ 458 U.S. 592, 607, 102 S.Ct. 3260, 73 L.Ed.2d
995 (1982) ("One helpful indication in determining whether an alleged injury
to the health and welfare of its citizens suffices to give the State standing
to sue _parens patriae_ is whether the injury is one that the State, if it
could, would likely attempt to address through its sovereign lawmaking
powers").

These sovereign prerogatives are now lodged in the Federal Government, and
Congress has ordered EPA to protect Massachusetts (among others) by
prescribing standards applicable to the "emission of any air pollutant from
any class or classes of new motor vehicle engines, which in [the
Administrator's] judgment cause, or contribute to, air pollution which may
reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare." 42 U.S.C. §
7521(a)(1). Congress has moreover recognized a concomitant procedural right to
challenge the rejection of its rulemaking petition as arbitrary and
capricious. § 7607(b)(1). Given that procedural right and Massachusetts' stake
in protecting its quasi-sovereign interests, the Commonwealth *1455 is
entitled to special solicitude in our standing analysis.[17]

With that in mind, it is clear that petitioners' submissions as they pertain
to Massachusetts have satisfied the most demanding standards of the
adversarial process. EPA's steadfast refusal to regulate greenhouse gas
emissions presents a risk of harm to Massachusetts that is both "actual" and
"imminent." _Lujan,_ 504 U.S., at 560, 112 S.Ct. 2130 (internal quotation
marks omitted). There is, moreover, a "substantial likelihood that the
judicial relief requested" will prompt EPA to take steps to reduce that risk.
_Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental Study Group, Inc.,_ 438 U.S. 59, 79,
98 S.Ct. 2620, 57 L.Ed.2d 595 (1978).

## _The Injury_

The harms associated with climate change are serious and well recognized.
Indeed, the NRC Report itselfwhich EPA regards as an "objective and
independent assessment of the relevant science," 68 Fed.Reg. 52930identifies
a number of environmental changes that have already inflicted significant
harms, including "the global retreat of mountain glaciers, reduction in snow-
cover extent, the earlier spring melting of rivers and lakes, [and] the
accelerated rate of rise of sea levels during the 20th century relative to the
past few thousand years ...." NRC Report 16.

Petitioners allege that this only hints at the environmental damage yet to
come. According to the climate scientist Michael *1456 MacCracken, "qualified
scientific experts involved in climate change research" have reached a "strong
consensus" that global warming threatens (among other things) a precipitate
rise in sea levels by the end of the century, MacCracken Decl. ¶ 15, Stdg.
App. 207, "severe and irreversible changes to natural ecosystems," _id.,_ ¶
5(d), at 209, a "significant reduction in water storage in winter snowpack in
mountainous regions with direct and important economic consequences," _ibid.,_
and an increase in the spread of disease, _id.,_ ¶ 28, at 218-219. He also
observes that rising ocean temperatures may contribute to the ferocity of
hurricanes. _Id.,_ ¶¶ 23-25, at 216-217.[18]

That these climate-change risks are "widely shared" does not minimize
Massachusetts' interest in the outcome of this litigation. See _Federal
Election Comm'n v. Akins,_ 524 U.S. 11, 24, 118 S.Ct. 1777, 141 L.Ed.2d 10
(1998) ("[W]here a harm is concrete, though widely shared, the Court has found
`injury in fact'"). According to petitioners' unchallenged affidavits, global
sea levels rose somewhere between 10 and 20 centimeters over the 20th century
as a result of global warming. MacCracken Decl. ¶ 5(c), Stdg.App. 208. These
rising seas have already begun to swallow Massachusetts' coastal land. _Id.,_
at 196 (declaration of Paul H. Kirshen ¶ 5), 216 (MacCracken Decl. ¶ 23).
Because the Commonwealth "owns a substantial portion of the state's coastal
property," _id.,_ at 171 (declaration of Karst R. Hoogeboom ¶ 4),[19] it has
alleged a particularized injury in its capacity as a landowner. The severity
of that injury will only increase over the course of the next century: If sea
levels continue to rise as predicted, one Massachusetts official believes that
a significant fraction of coastal property will be "either permanently lost
through inundation or temporarily lost through periodic storm surge and
flooding events." _Id.,_ ¶ 6, at 172.[20] Remediation costs alone, petitioners
allege, could run well into the hundreds of millions of dollars. _Id.,_ ¶ 7,
at 172; see also Kirshen Decl. ¶ 12, at 198.[21]

##  *1457 _Causation_

EPA does not dispute the existence of a causal connection between man-made
greenhouse gas emissions and global warming. At a minimum, therefore, EPA's
refusal to regulate such emissions "contributes" to Massachusetts' injuries.

EPA nevertheless maintains that its decision not to regulate greenhouse gas
emissions from new motor vehicles contributes so insignificantly to
petitioners' injuries that the agency cannot be haled into federal court to
answer for them. For the same reason, EPA does not believe that any realistic
possibility exists that the relief petitioners seek would mitigate global
climate change and remedy their injuries. That is especially so because
predicted increases in greenhouse gas emissions from developing nations,
particularly China and India, are likely to offset any marginal domestic
decrease.

But EPA overstates its case. Its argument rests on the erroneous assumption
that a small incremental step, because it is incremental, can never be
attacked in a federal judicial forum. Yet accepting that premise would doom
most challenges to regulatory action. Agencies, like legislatures, do not
generally resolve massive problems in one fell regulatory swoop. See
_Williamson v. Lee Optical of Okla., Inc.,_ 348 U.S. 483, 489, 75 S.Ct. 461,
99 L.Ed. 563 (1955) ("[A] reform may take one step at a time, addressing
itself to the phase of the problem which seems most acute to the legislative
mind"). They instead whittle away at them over time, refining their preferred
approach as circumstances change and as they develop a more-nuanced
understanding of how best to proceed. Cf. _SEC v. Chenery Corp.,_ 332 U.S.
194, 202, 67 S.Ct. 1575, 91 L.Ed. 1995 (1947) ("Some principles must await
their own development, while others must be adjusted to meet particular,
unforeseeable situations"). That a first step might be tentative does not by
itself support the notion that federal courts lack jurisdiction to determine
whether that step conforms to law.

And reducing domestic automobile emissions is hardly a tentative step. Even
leaving aside the other greenhouse gases, the United States transportation
sector emits an enormous quantity of carbon dioxide into the
atmosphereaccording to the MacCracken affidavit, more than 1.7 billion metric
tons in 1999 alone. ¶ 30, Stdg.App. 219. That accounts for more than 6% of
worldwide carbon dioxide emissions. _Id.,_ at 232 (Oppenheimer Decl. ¶ 3); see
also MacCracken Decl. ¶ 31, at 220. To put this in perspective: Considering
just emissions from the transportation sector, which represent less than one-
third of this country's total carbon dioxide emissions, the United States
would still rank as the third-largest emitter of carbon dioxide in the world,
outpaced only by the European Union and China.[22] Judged by any *1458
standard, U.S. motor-vehicle emissions make a meaningful contribution to
greenhouse gas concentrations and hence, according to petitioners, to global
warming.

## _The Remedy_

While it may be true that regulating motor-vehicle emissions will not by
itself _reverse_ global warming, it by no means follows that we lack
jurisdiction to decide whether EPA has a duty to take steps to _slow_ or
_reduce_ it. See also _Larson v. Valente,_ 456 U.S. 228, 244, n. 15, 102 S.Ct.
1673, 72 L.Ed.2d 33 (1982) ("[A] plaintiff satisfies the redressability
requirement when he shows that a favorable decision will relieve a discrete
injury to himself. He need not show that a favorable decision will relieve his
_every_ injury"). Because of the enormity of the potential consequences
associated with man-made climate change, the fact that the effectiveness of a
remedy might be delayed during the (relatively short) time it takes for a new
motor-vehicle fleet to replace an older one is essentially irrelevant.[23] Nor
is it dispositive that developing countries such as China and India are poised
to increase greenhouse gas emissions substantially over the next century: A
reduction in domestic emissions would slow the pace of global emissions
increases, no matter what happens elsewhere.

We moreover attach considerable significance to EPA's "agree[ment] with the
President that `we must address the issue of global climate change,'" 68
Fed.Reg. 52929 (quoting remarks announcing Clear Skies and Global Climate
Initiatives, 2002 Public Papers of George W. Bush, Vol. 1, Feb. 14, p. 227
(2004)), and to EPA's ardent support for various voluntary emission-reduction
programs, 68 Fed.Reg. 52932. As Judge Tatel observed in dissent below, "EPA
would presumably not bother with such efforts if it thought emissions
reductions would have no discernable impact on future global warming." 415
F.3d, at 66.

In sumat least according to petitioners' uncontested affidavitsthe rise in
sea levels associated with global warming has already harmed and will continue
to harm Massachusetts. The risk of catastrophic harm, though remote, is
nevertheless real. That risk would be reduced to some extent if petitioners
received the relief they seek. We therefore hold that petitioners have
standing to challenge the EPA's denial of their rulemaking petition.[24]

##  *1459 V

The scope of our review of the merits of the statutory issues is narrow. As we
have repeated time and again, an agency has broad discretion to choose how
best to marshal its limited resources and personnel to carry out its delegated
responsibilities. See _Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense
Council, Inc.,_ 467 U.S. 837, 842-845, 104 S.Ct. 2778, 81 L.Ed.2d 694 (1984).
That discretion is at its height when the agency decides not to bring an
enforcement action. Therefore, in _Heckler v. Chaney,_ 470 U.S. 821, 105 S.Ct.
1649, 84 L.Ed.2d 714 (1985), we held that an agency's refusal to initiate
enforcement proceedings is not ordinarily subject to judicial review. Some
debate remains, however, as to the rigor with which we review an agency's
denial of a petition for rulemaking.

There are key differences between a denial of a petition for rulemaking and an
agency's decision not to initiate an enforcement action. See _American Horse
Protection Assn., Inc. v. Lyng,_ 812 F.2d 1, 3-4 (C.A.D.C.1987). In contrast
to nonenforcement decisions, agency refusals to initiate rulemaking "are less
frequent, more apt to involve legal as opposed to factual analysis, and
subject to special formalities, including a public explanation." _Id.,_ at 4;
see also 5 U.S.C. § 555(e). They moreover arise out of denials of petitions
for rulemaking which (at least in the circumstances here) the affected party
had an undoubted procedural right to file in the first instance. Refusals to
promulgate rules are thus susceptible to judicial review, though such review
is "extremely limited" and "highly deferential." _National Customs Brokers &
Forwarders Assn. of America, Inc. v. United States,_ 883 F.2d 93, 96
(C.A.D.C.1989).

EPA concluded in its denial of the petition for rulemaking that it lacked
authority under 42 U.S.C. § 7521(a)(1) to regulate new vehicle emissions
because carbon dioxide is not an "air pollutant" as that term is defined in §
7602. In the alternative, it concluded that even if it possessed authority, it
would decline to do so because regulation would conflict with other
administration priorities. As discussed earlier, the Clean Air Act expressly
permits review of such an action. § 7607(b)(1). We therefore "may reverse any
such action found to be... arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or
otherwise not in accordance with law." § 7607(d)(9).

## VI

On the merits, the first question is whether § 202(a)(1) of the Clean Air Act
authorizes EPA to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from new motor vehicles in
the event that it forms a "judgment" that such emissions contribute to climate
change. We have little trouble concluding that it does. In relevant part, §
202(a)(1) provides that EPA "shall by regulation *1460 prescribe ... standards
applicable to the emission of any air pollutant from any class or classes of
new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines, which in [the
Administrator's] judgment cause, or contribute to, air pollution which may
reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare." 42 U.S.C. §
7521(a)(1). Because EPA believes that Congress did not intend it to regulate
substances that contribute to climate change, the agency maintains that carbon
dioxide is not an "air pollutant" within the meaning of the provision.

The statutory text forecloses EPA's reading. The Clean Air Act's sweeping
definition of "air pollutant" includes " _any_ air pollution agent or
combination of such agents, including _any_ physical, chemical... substance or
matter which is emitted into or otherwise enters the ambient air... ." §
7602(g) (emphasis added). On its face, the definition embraces all airborne
compounds of whatever stripe, and underscores that intent through the repeated
use of the word "any."[25] Carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and
hydrofluorocarbons are without a doubt "physical [and] chemical ...
substance[s] which [are] emitted into ... the ambient air." The statute is
unambiguous.[26]

Rather than relying on statutory text, EPA invokes postenactment congressional
actions and deliberations it views as tantamount to a congressional command to
refrain from regulating greenhouse gas emissions. Even if such postenactment
legislative history could shed light on the meaning of an otherwise-
unambiguous statute, EPA never identifies any action remotely suggesting that
Congress meant to curtail its power to treat greenhouse gases as air
pollutants. That subsequent Congresses have eschewed enacting binding
emissions limitations to combat global warming tells us nothing about what
Congress meant when it amended § 202(a)(1) in 1970 and 1977.[27] And unlike
EPA, we have no difficulty reconciling Congress' various efforts to promote
interagency collaboration and research to better understand *1461 climate
change[28] with the agency's pre-existing mandate to regulate "any air
pollutant" that may endanger the public welfare. See 42 U.S.C. § 7601(a)(1).
Collaboration and research do not conflict with any thoughtful regulatory
effort; they complement it.[29]

EPA's reliance on _Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp.,_ 529 U.S. 120, 120 S.Ct.
1291, 146 L.Ed.2d 121, is similarly misplaced. In holding that tobacco
products are not "drugs" or "devices" subject to Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) regulation pursuant to the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FDCA), see 529
U.S., at 133, 120 S.Ct. 1291, we found critical at least two considerations
that have no counterpart in this case.

First, we thought it unlikely that Congress meant to ban tobacco products,
which the FDCA would have required had such products been classified as
"drugs" or "devices." _Id.,_ at 135-137, 120 S.Ct. 1291. Here, in contrast,
EPA jurisdiction would lead to no such extreme measures. EPA would only
_regulate_ emissions, and even then, it would have to delay any action "to
permit the development and application of the requisite technology, giving
appropriate consideration to the cost of compliance," § 7521(a)(2). However
much a ban on tobacco products clashed with the "common sense" intuition that
Congress never meant to remove those products from circulation, _Brown &
Williamson,_ 529 U.S., at 133, 120 S.Ct. 1291, there is nothing
counterintuitive to the notion that EPA can curtail the emission of substances
that are putting the global climate out of kilter.

Second, in _Brown & Williamson_ we pointed to an unbroken series of
congressional enactments that made sense only if adopted "against the backdrop
of the FDA's consistent and repeated statements that it lacked authority under
the FDCA to regulate tobacco." _Id.,_ at 144, 120 S.Ct. 1291. We can point to
no such enactments here: EPA has not identified any congressional action that
conflicts in any way with the regulation of greenhouse gases from new motor
vehicles. Even if it had, Congress could not have acted against a regulatory
"backdrop" of disclaimers of regulatory authority. Prior to the order that
provoked this litigation, EPA had never disavowed the authority to regulate
greenhouse gases, and in 1998 it in fact affirmed that it _had_ such
authority. See App. 54 (Cannon memorandum). There is no reason, much less a
compelling reason, to accept EPA's invitation to read ambiguity into a clear
statute.

EPA finally argues that it cannot regulate carbon dioxide emissions from *1462
motor vehicles because doing so would require it to tighten mileage standards,
a job (according to EPA) that Congress has assigned to DOT. See 68 Fed.Reg.
52929. But that DOT sets mileage standards in no way licenses EPA to shirk its
environmental responsibilities. EPA has been charged with protecting the
public's "health" and "welfare," 42 U.S.C. § 7521(a)(1), a statutory
obligation wholly independent of DOT's mandate to promote energy efficiency.
See Energy Policy and Conservation Act, § 2(5), 89 Stat. 874, 42 U.S.C. §
6201(5). The two obligations may overlap, but there is no reason to think the
two agencies cannot both administer their obligations and yet avoid
inconsistency.

While the Congresses that drafted § 202(a)(1) might not have appreciated the
possibility that burning fossil fuels could lead to global warming, they did
understand that without regulatory flexibility, changing circumstances and
scientific developments would soon render the Clean Air Act obsolete. The
broad language of § 202(a)(1) reflects an intentional effort to confer the
flexibility necessary to forestall such obsolescence. See _Pennsylvania Dept.
of Corrections v. Yeskey,_ 524 U.S. 206, 212, 118 S.Ct. 1952, 141 L.Ed.2d 215
(1998) ("[T]he fact that a statute can be applied in situations not expressly
anticipated by Congress does not demonstrate ambiguity. It demonstrates
breadth" (internal quotation marks omitted)). Because greenhouse gases fit
well within the Clean Air Act's capacious definition of "air pollutant," we
hold that EPA has the statutory authority to regulate the emission of such
gases from new motor vehicles.

## VII

The alternative basis for EPA's decisionthat even if it does have statutory
authority to regulate greenhouse gases, it would be unwise to do so at this
timerests on reasoning divorced from the statutory text. While the statute
does condition the exercise of EPA's authority on its formation of a
"judgment," 42 U.S.C. § 7521(a)(1), that judgment must relate to whether an
air pollutant "cause[s], or contribute[s] to, air pollution which may
reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare," _ibid._ Put
another way, the use of the word "judgment" is not a roving license to ignore
the statutory text. It is but a direction to exercise discretion within
defined statutory limits.

If EPA makes a finding of endangerment, the Clean Air Act requires the agency
to regulate emissions of the deleterious pollutant from new motor vehicles.
_Ibid._ (stating that "[EPA] shall by regulation prescribe ... standards
applicable to the emission of any air pollutant from any class of new motor
vehicles"). EPA no doubt has significant latitude as to the manner, timing,
content, and coordination of its regulations with those of other agencies. But
once EPA has responded to a petition for rulemaking, its reasons for action or
inaction must conform to the authorizing statute. Under the clear terms of the
Clean Air Act, EPA can avoid taking further action only if it determines that
greenhouse gases do not contribute to climate change or if it provides some
reasonable explanation as to why it cannot or will not exercise its discretion
to determine whether they do. _Ibid._ To the extent that this constrains
agency discretion to pursue other priorities of the Administrator or the
President, this is the congressional design.

EPA has refused to comply with this clear statutory command. Instead, it has
offered a laundry list of reasons not to regulate. For example, EPA said that
a number of voluntary executive branch programs already provide an effective
response to the threat of global warming, 68 *1463 Fed.Reg. 52932, that
regulating greenhouse gases might impair the President's ability to negotiate
with "key developing nations" to reduce emissions, _id.,_ at 52931, and that
curtailing motor-vehicle emissions would reflect "an inefficient, piecemeal
approach to address the climate change issue," _ibid._

Although we have neither the expertise nor the authority to evaluate these
policy judgments, it is evident they have nothing to do with whether
greenhouse gas emissions contribute to climate change. Still less do they
amount to a reasoned justification for declining to form a scientific
judgment. In particular, while the President has broad authority in foreign
affairs, that authority does not extend to the refusal to execute domestic
laws. In the Global Climate Protection Act of 1987, Congress authorized the
State Departmentnot EPAto formulate United States foreign policy with
reference to environmental matters relating to climate. See § 1103(c), 101
Stat. 1409. EPA has made no showing that it issued the ruling in question here
after consultation with the State Department. Congress did direct EPA to
consult with other agencies in the formulation of its policies and rules, but
the State Department is absent from that list. § 1103(b).

Nor can EPA avoid its statutory obligation by noting the uncertainty
surrounding various features of climate change and concluding that it would
therefore be better not to regulate at this time. See 68 Fed.Reg. 52930-52931.
If the scientific uncertainty is so profound that it precludes EPA from making
a reasoned judgment as to whether greenhouse gases contribute to global
warming, EPA must say so. That EPA would prefer not to regulate greenhouse
gases because of some residual uncertaintywhich, contrary to Justice SCALIA's
apparent belief, _post,_ at 1466-1468, is in fact all that it said, see 68
Fed.Reg. 52929 ("We do not believe ... that it would be either effective or
appropriate for EPA _to establish [greenhouse gas] standards for motor
vehicles_ at this time" (emphasis added))is irrelevant. The statutory
question is whether sufficient information exists to make an endangerment
finding.

In short, EPA has offered no reasoned explanation for its refusal to decide
whether greenhouse gases cause or contribute to climate change. Its action was
therefore "arbitrary, capricious, ... or otherwise not in accordance with
law." 42 U.S.C. § 7607(d)(9)(A). We need not and do not reach the question
whether on remand EPA must make an endangerment finding, or whether policy
concerns can inform EPA's actions in the event that it makes such a finding.
Cf. _Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.,_ 467 U.S.
837, 843-844, 104 S.Ct. 2778, 81 L.Ed.2d 694 (1984). We hold only that EPA
must ground its reasons for action or inaction in the statute.

## VIII

The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed, and the case is remanded for
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.

_It is so ordered._

Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice SCALIA, Justice THOMAS, and Justice
ALITO join, dissenting.

Global warming may be a "crisis," even "the most pressing environmental
problem of our time." Pet. for Cert. 26, 22. Indeed, it may ultimately affect
nearly everyone on the planet in some potentially adverse way, and it may be
that governments have done too little to address it. It is not a problem,
however, that has escaped the attention of policymakers in the Executive *1464
and Legislative Branches of our Government, who continue to consider
regulatory, legislative, and treaty-based means of addressing global climate
change.

Apparently dissatisfied with the pace of progress on this issue in the elected
branches, petitioners have come to the courts claiming broad-ranging injury,
and attempting to tie that injury to the Government's alleged failure to
comply with a rather narrow statutory provision. I would reject these
challenges as nonjusticiable. Such a conclusion involves no judgment on
whether global warming exists, what causes it, or the extent of the problem.
Nor does it render petitioners without recourse. This Court's standing
jurisprudence simply recognizes that redress of grievances of the sort at
issue here "is the function of Congress and the Chief Executive," not the
federal courts. _Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife,_ 504 U.S. 555, 576, 112 S.Ct.
2130, 119 L.Ed.2d 351 (1992). I would vacate the judgment below and remand for
dismissal of the petitions for review.

## I

Article III, § 2, of the Constitution limits the federal judicial power to the
adjudication of "Cases" and "Controversies." "If a dispute is not a proper
case or controversy, the courts have no business deciding it, or expounding
the law in the course of doing so." _DaimlerChrysler Corp. v. Cuno,_ 547 U.S.
___, ___, 126 S.Ct. 1854, 1860-1861, 164 L.Ed.2d 589 (2006). "Standing to sue
is part of the common understanding of what it takes to make a justiciable
case," _Steel Co. v. Citizens for Better Environment,_ 523 U.S. 83, 102, 118
S.Ct. 1003, 140 L.Ed.2d 210 (1998), and has been described as "an essential
and unchanging part of the case-or-controversy requirement of Article III,"
_Defenders of Wildlife, supra,_ at 560, 112 S.Ct. 2130.

Our modern framework for addressing standing is familiar: "A plaintiff must
allege personal injury fairly traceable to the defendant's allegedly unlawful
conduct and likely to be redressed by the requested relief." _DaimlerChrysler,
supra,_ at ___, 126 S.Ct., at 1861 (quoting _Allen v. Wright,_ 468 U.S. 737,
751, 104 S.Ct. 3315, 82 L.Ed.2d 556 (1984) (internal quotation marks
omitted)). Applying that standard here, petitioners bear the burden of
alleging an injury that is fairly traceable to the Environmental Protection
Agency's failure to promulgate new motor vehicle greenhouse gas emission
standards, and that is likely to be redressed by the prospective issuance of
such standards.

Before determining whether petitioners can meet this familiar test, however,
the Court changes the rules. It asserts that "States are not normal litigants
for the purposes of invoking federal jurisdiction," and that given
"Massachusetts' stake in protecting its quasi-sovereign interests, the
Commonwealth is entitled to _special solicitude_ in our standing analysis."
_Ante,_ at 1454, 1455 (emphasis added).

Relaxing Article III standing requirements because asserted injuries are
pressed by a State, however, has no basis in our jurisprudence, and support
for any such "special solicitude" is conspicuously absent from the Court's
opinion. The general judicial review provision cited by the Court, 42 U.S.C. §
7607(b)(1), affords States no special rights or status. The Court states that
"Congress has ordered EPA to protect Massachusetts (among others)" through the
statutory provision at issue, § 7521(a)(1), and that "Congress has...
recognized a concomitant procedural right to challenge the rejection of its
rule-making petition as arbitrary and capricious." _Ante,_ at 1454. The reader
might think from this unfortunate phrasing that Congress said something about
the rights *1465 of States in this particular provision of the statute.
Congress knows how to do that when it wants to, see, _e.g.,_ § 7426(b)
(affording States the right to petition EPA to directly regulate certain
sources of pollution), but it has done nothing of the sort here. Under the law
on which petitioners rely, Congress treated public and private litigants
exactly the same.

Nor does the case law cited by the Court provide any support for the notion
that Article III somehow implicitly treats public and private litigants
differently. The Court has to go back a full century in an attempt to justify
its novel standing rule, but even there it comes up short. The Court's
analysis hinges on _Georgia v. Tennessee Copper Co.,_ 206 U.S. 230, 27 S.Ct.
618, 51 L.Ed. 1038 (1907)a case that did indeed draw a distinction between a
State and private litigants, but solely with respect to available remedies.
The case had nothing to do with Article III standing.

In _Tennessee Copper,_ the State of Georgia sought to enjoin copper companies
in neighboring Tennessee from discharging pollutants that were inflicting "a
wholesale destruction of forests, orchards and crops" in bordering Georgia
counties. _Id.,_ at 236, 27 S.Ct. 618. Although the State owned very little of
the territory allegedly affected, the Court reasoned that Georgiain its
capacity as a " _quasi_ -sovereign""has an interest independent of and behind
the titles of its citizens, in all the earth and air within its domain."
_Id.,_ at 237, 27 S.Ct. 618. The Court explained that while "[t]he very
elements that would be relied upon in a suit between fellow-citizens as a
ground for equitable relief [were] wanting," a State "is not lightly to be
required to give up _quasi_ -sovereign rights for pay." _Ibid._ Thus while a
complaining private litigant would have to make do with a _legal_ remedyone
"for pay"the State was entitled to _equitable_ relief. See _id.,_ at 237-238,
27 S.Ct. 618.

In contrast to the present case, there was no question in _Tennessee Copper_
about Article III injury. See _id.,_ at 238-239, 27 S.Ct. 618. There was
certainly no suggestion that the State could show standing where the private
parties could not; there was no dispute, after all, that the private
landowners had "an action at law." _Id.,_ at 238, 27 S.Ct. 618. _Tennessee
Copper_ has since stood for nothing more than a State's right, in an original
jurisdiction action, to sue in a representative capacity as _parens patriae._
See, _e.g.,_ _Maryland v. Louisiana,_ 451 U.S. 725, 737, 101 S.Ct. 2114, 68
L.Ed.2d 576 (1981). Nothing about a State's ability to sue in that capacity
dilutes the bedrock requirement of showing injury, causation, and
redressability to satisfy Article III.

A claim of _parens patriae_ standing is distinct from an allegation of direct
injury. See _Wyoming v. Oklahoma,_ 502 U.S. 437, 448-449, 451, 112 S.Ct. 789,
117 L.Ed.2d 1 (1992). Far from being a substitute for Article III injury,
_parens patriae_ actions raise an additional hurdle for a state litigant: the
articulation of a "quasi-sovereign interest" " _apart_ from the interests of
particular private parties." _Alfred L. Snapp & Son, Inc. v. Puerto Rico ex
rel. Barez,_ 458 U.S. 592, 607, 102 S.Ct. 3260, 73 L.Ed.2d 995 (1982)
(emphasis added) (cited _ante,_ at 1454). Just as an association suing on
behalf of its members must show not only that it represents the members but
that at least one satisfies Article III requirements, so too a State asserting
quasi-sovereign interests as _parens patriae_ must still show that its
citizens satisfy Article III. Focusing on Massachusetts's interests as quasi-
sovereign makes the required showing here harder, not easier. The Court, in
effect, takes what has always been regarded as a _necessary_ condition for
*1466 _parens patriae_ standinga quasi-sovereign interestand converts it
into a _sufficient_ showing for purposes of Article III.

What is more, the Court's reasoning falters on its own terms. The Court
asserts that Massachusetts is entitled to "special solicitude" due to its
"quasi-sovereign interests," _ante,_ at 1455, but then applies our Article III
standing test to the asserted injury of the State's loss of coastal property.
See _ante,_ at 1456 (concluding that Massachusetts "has alleged a
particularized injury _in its capacity as a landowner_ " (emphasis added)). In
the context of _parens patriae_ standing, however, we have characterized state
ownership of land as a "nonsovereign interes[t]" because a State "is likely to
have the same interests as other similarly situated proprietors." _Alfred L.
Snapp & Son, supra,_ at 601, 102 S.Ct. 3260.

On top of everything else, the Court overlooks the fact that our cases cast
significant doubt on a State's standing to assert a quasi-sovereign
interestas opposed to a direct injuryagainst the Federal Government. As a
general rule, we have held that while a State might assert a quasi-sovereign
right as _parens patriae_ "for the protection of its citizens, it is no part
of its duty or power to enforce their rights in respect of their relations
with the Federal Government. In that field it is the United States, and not
the State, which represents them." _Massachusetts v. Mellon,_ 262 U.S. 447,
485-486, 43 S.Ct. 597, 67 L.Ed. 1078 (1923) (citation omitted); see also
_Alfred L. Snapp & Son, supra,_ at 610, n. 16, 102 S.Ct. 3260.

All of this presumably explains why petitioners never cited _Tennessee Copper_
in their briefs before this Court or the D.C. Circuit. It presumably explains
why not one of the legion of _amici_ supporting petitioners ever cited the
case. And it presumably explains why not one of the three judges writing below
ever cited the case either. Given that one purpose of the standing requirement
is "`to assure that concrete adverseness which sharpens the presentation of
issues upon which the court so largely depends for illumination,'" _ante,_ at
1452-1453 (quoting _Baker v. Carr,_ 369 U.S. 186, 204, 82 S.Ct. 691, 7 L.Ed.2d
663 (1962)), it is ironic that the Court today adopts a new theory of Article
III standing for States without the benefit of briefing or argument on the
point.[1]

## II

It is not at all clear how the Court's "special solicitude" for Massachusetts
plays out in the standing analysis, except as an implicit concession that
petitioners cannot establish standing on traditional terms. But the status of
Massachusetts as *1467 a State cannot compensate for petitioners' failure to
demonstrate injury in fact, causation, and redressability.

When the Court actually applies the three-part test, it focuses, as did the
dissent below, see 415 F.3d 50, 64 (C.A.D.C.2005) (opinion of Tatel, J.), on
the State's asserted loss of coastal land as the injury in fact. If
petitioners rely on loss of land as the Article III injury, however, they must
ground the rest of the standing analysis in that specific injury. That alleged
injury must be "concrete and particularized," _Defenders of Wildlife,_ 504
U.S., at 560, 112 S.Ct. 2130, and "distinct and palpable," _Allen,_ 468 U.S.,
at 751, 104 S.Ct. 3315 (internal quotation marks omitted). Central to this
concept of "particularized" injury is the requirement that a plaintiff be
affected in a "personal and individual way," _Defenders of Wildlife,_ 504
U.S., at 560, n. 1, 112 S.Ct. 2130, and seek relief that "directly and
tangibly benefits him" in a manner distinct from its impact on "the public at
large," _id.,_ at 573-574, 112 S.Ct. 2130. Without "particularized injury,
there can be no confidence of `a real need to exercise the power of judicial
review' or that relief can be framed `no broader than required by the precise
facts to which the court's ruling would be applied.'" _Warth v. Seldin,_ 422
U.S. 490, 508, 95 S.Ct. 2197, 45 L.Ed.2d 343 (1975) (quoting _Schlesinger v.
Reservists Comm. to Stop the War,_ 418 U.S. 208, 221-222, 94 S.Ct. 2925, 41
L.Ed.2d 706 (1974)).

The very concept of global warming seems inconsistent with this
particularization requirement. Global warming is a phenomenon "harmful to
humanity at large," 415 F.3d, at 60 (Sentelle, J., dissenting in part and
concurring in judgment), and the redress petitioners seek is focused no more
on them than on the public generallyit is literally to change the atmosphere
around the world.

If petitioners' particularized injury is loss of coastal land, it is also that
injury that must be "actual or imminent, not conjectural or hypothetical,"
_Defenders of Wildlife, supra,_ at 560, 112 S.Ct. 2130 (internal quotation
marks omitted), "real and immediate," _Los Angeles v. Lyons,_ 461 U.S. 95,
102, 103 S.Ct. 1660, 75 L.Ed.2d 675 (1983) (internal quotation marks omitted),
and "certainly impending," _Whitmore v. Arkansas,_ 495 U.S. 149, 158, 110
S.Ct. 1717, 109 L.Ed.2d 135 (1990) (internal quotation marks omitted).

As to "actual" injury, the Court observes that "global sea levels rose
somewhere between 10 and 20 centimeters over the 20th century as a result of
global warming" and that "[t]hese rising seas have already begun to swallow
Massachusetts' coastal land." _Ante,_ at 1456. But none of petitioners'
declarations supports that connection. One declaration states that "a rise in
sea level due to climate change is occurring on the coast of Massachusetts, in
the metropolitan Boston area," but there is no elaboration. Petitioners'
Standing Appendix in No. 03-1361, etc. (CADC), p. 196 (Stdg.App.). And the
declarant goes on to identify a "significan[t]" _non_ -global-warming cause of
Boston's rising sea level: land subsidence. _Id.,_ at 197; see also _id.,_ at
216. Thus, aside from a single conclusory statement, there is nothing in
petitioners' 43 standing declarations and accompanying exhibits to support an
inference of actual loss of Massachusetts coastal land from 20th century
global sea level increases. It is pure conjecture.

The Court's attempts to identify "imminent" or "certainly impending" loss of
Massachusetts coastal land fares no better. See _ante,_ at 1456-1457. One of
petitioners' declarants predicts global warming will cause sea level to rise
by 20 to 70 centimeters _by the year 2100._ Stdg.App. 216. Another uses a
computer modeling *1468 program to map the Commonwealth's coastal land and its
current elevation, and calculates that the high-end estimate of sea level rise
would result in the loss of significant state-owned coastal land. _Id.,_ at
179. But the computer modeling program has a conceded average error of about
30 centimeters and a maximum observed error of 70 centimeters. _Id.,_ at
177-178. As an initial matter, if it is possible that the model
underrepresents the elevation of coastal land to an extent equal to or in
excess of the projected sea level rise, it is difficult to put much stock in
the predicted loss of land. But even placing that problem to the side,
accepting a century-long time horizon and a series of compounded estimates
renders requirements of imminence and immediacy utterly toothless. See
_Defenders of Wildlife, supra,_ at 565, n. 2, 112 S.Ct. 2130 (while the
concept of "`imminence'" in standing doctrine is "somewhat elastic," it can be
"stretched beyond the breaking point"). "Allegations of possible future injury
do not satisfy the requirements of Art. III. A threatened injury must be
_certainly impending_ to constitute injury in fact." _Whitmore, supra,_ at
158, 110 S.Ct. 1717. (internal quotation marks omitted; emphasis added).

## III

Petitioners' reliance on Massachusetts's loss of coastal land as their injury
in fact for standing purposes creates insurmountable problems for them with
respect to causation and redressability. To establish standing, petitioners
must show a causal connection between that specific injury and the lack of new
motor vehicle greenhouse gas emission standards, and that the promulgation of
such standards would likely redress that injury. As is often the case, the
questions of causation and redressability overlap. See _Allen,_ 468 U.S., at
753, n. 19, 104 S.Ct. 3315 (observing that the two requirements were
"initially articulated by this Court as two facets of a single causation
requirement" (internal quotation marks omitted)). And importantly, when a
party is challenging the Government's allegedly unlawful regulation, or lack
of regulation, of a third party, satisfying the causation and redressability
requirements becomes "substantially more difficult." _Defenders of Wildlife,
supra,_ at 562, 112 S.Ct. 2130 (internal quotation marks omitted); see also
_Warth, supra,_ at 504-505, 95 S.Ct. 2197.

Petitioners view the relationship between their injuries and EPA's failure to
promulgate new motor vehicle greenhouse gas emission standards as simple and
direct: Domestic motor vehicles emit carbon dioxide and other greenhouse
gases. Worldwide emissions of greenhouse gases contribute to global warming
and therefore also to petitioners' alleged injuries. Without the new vehicle
standards, greenhouse gas emissionsand therefore global warming and its
attendant harmshave been higher than they otherwise would have been; once EPA
changes course, the trend will be reversed.

The Court ignores the complexities of global warming, and does so by now
disregarding the "particularized" injury it relied on in step one, and using
the dire nature of global warming itself as a bootstrap for finding causation
and redressability. First, it is important to recognize the extent of the
emissions at issue here. Because local greenhouse gas emissions disperse
throughout the atmosphere and remain there for anywhere from 50 to 200 years,
it is global emissions data that are relevant. See App. to Pet. for Cert.
A-73. According to one of petitioners' declarations, domestic motor vehicles
contribute about 6 percent of global carbon dioxide emissions and 4 percent of
global greenhouse gas emissions. Stdg.App. 232. The amount of global emissions
at issue here is *1469 smaller still; § 202(a)(1) of the Clean Air Act covers
only _new_ motor vehicles and _new_ motor vehicle engines, so petitioners'
desired emission standards might reduce only a fraction of 4 percent of global
emissions.

This gets us only to the relevant greenhouse gas emissions; linking them to
global warming and ultimately to petitioners' alleged injuries next requires
consideration of further complexities. As EPA explained in its denial of
petitioners' request for rulemaking,

> "predicting future climate change necessarily involves a complex web of
> economic and physical factors including: our ability to predict future
> global anthropogenic emissions of [greenhouse gases] and aerosols; the fate
> of these emissions once they enter the atmosphere (e.g., what percentage are
> absorbed by vegetation or are taken up by the oceans); the impact of those
> emissions that remain in the atmosphere on the radiative properties of the
> atmosphere; changes in critically important climate feedbacks (e.g., changes
> in cloud cover and ocean circulation); changes in temperature
> characteristics (e.g., average temperatures, shifts in daytime and evening
> temperatures); changes in other climatic parameters (e.g., shifts in
> precipitation, storms); and ultimately the impact of such changes on human
> health and welfare (e.g., increases or decreases in agricultural
> productivity, human health impacts)." App. to Pet. for Cert. A-83 through
> A-84.

Petitioners are never able to trace their alleged injuries back through this
complex web to the fractional amount of global emissions that might have been
limited with EPA standards. In light of the bit-part domestic new motor
vehicle greenhouse gas emissions have played in what petitioners describe as a
150-year global phenomenon, and the myriad additional factors bearing on
petitioners' alleged injurythe loss of Massachusetts coastal landthe
connection is far too speculative to establish causation.

## IV

Redressability is even more problematic. To the tenuous link between
petitioners' alleged injury and the indeterminate fractional domestic
emissions at issue here, add the fact that petitioners cannot meaningfully
predict what will come of the 80 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions
that originate outside the United States. As the Court acknowledges,
"developing countries such as China and India are poised to increase
greenhouse gas emissions substantially over the next century," _ante,_ at
1458, so the domestic emissions at issue here may become an increasingly
marginal portion of global emissions, and any decreases produced by
petitioners' desired standards are likely to be overwhelmed many times over by
emissions increases elsewhere in the world.

Petitioners offer declarations attempting to address this uncertainty,
contending that "[i]f the U.S. takes steps to reduce motor vehicle emissions,
other countries are very likely to take similar actions regarding their own
motor vehicles using technology developed in response to the U.S. program."
Stdg.App. 220; see also _id.,_ at 311-312. In other words, do not worry that
other countries will contribute far more to global warming than will U.S.
automobile emissions; someone is bound to invent something, and places like
the People's Republic of China or India will surely require use of the new
technology, regardless of cost. The Court previously has explained that when
the existence of an element of standing "depends on the unfettered choices
made by independent actors not before the courts and whose *1470 exercise of
broad and legitimate discretion the courts cannot presume either to control or
to predict," a party must present facts supporting an assertion that the actor
will proceed in such a manner. _Defenders of Wildlife,_ 504 U.S., at 562, 112
S.Ct. 2130 (quoting _ASARCO Inc. v. Kadish,_ 490 U.S. 605, 615, 109 S.Ct.
2037, 104 L.Ed.2d 696 (1989) (opinion of KENNEDY, J.); internal quotation
marks omitted). The declarations' conclusory (not to say fanciful) statements
do not even come close.

No matter, the Court reasons, because _any_ decrease in domestic emissions
will "slow the pace of global emissions increases, no matter what happens
elsewhere." _Ante,_ at 1458. Every little bit helps, so Massachusetts can sue
over any little bit.

The Court's sleight-of-hand is in failing to link up the different elements of
the three-part standing test. What must be _likely_ to be redressed is the
particular injury in fact. The injury the Court looks to is the asserted loss
of land. The Court contends that regulating domestic motor vehicle emissions
will reduce carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, _and therefore_ redress
Massachusetts's injury. But even if regulation _does_ reduce emissionsto some
indeterminate degree, given events elsewhere in the worldthe Court never
explains why that makes it _likely_ that the injury in factthe loss of
landwill be redressed. Schoolchildren know that a kingdom might be lost "all
for the want of a horseshoe nail," but "likely" redressability is a different
matter. The realities make it pure conjecture to suppose that EPA regulation
of new automobile emissions will _likely_ prevent the loss of Massachusetts
coastal land.

## V

Petitioners' difficulty in demonstrating causation and redressability is not
surprising given the evident mismatch between the source of their alleged
injurycatastrophic global warmingand the narrow subject matter of the Clean
Air Act provision at issue in this suit. The mismatch suggests that
petitioners' true goal for this litigation may be more symbolic than anything
else. The constitutional role of the courts, however, is to decide concrete
casesnot to serve as a convenient forum for policy debates. See _Valley Forge
Christian College v. Americans United for Separation of Church and State,
Inc.,_ 454 U.S. 464, 472, 102 S.Ct. 752, 70 L.Ed.2d 700 (1982) ("[Standing]
tends to assure that the legal questions presented to the court will be
resolved, not in the rarified atmosphere of a debating society, but in a
concrete factual context conducive to a realistic appreciation of the
consequences of judicial action").

When dealing with legal doctrine phrased in terms of what is "fairly"
traceable or "likely" to be redressed, it is perhaps not surprising that the
matter is subject to some debate. But in considering how loosely or rigorously
to define those adverbs, it is vital to keep in mind the purpose of the
inquiry. The limitation of the judicial power to cases and controversies "is
crucial in maintaining the tripartite allocation of power set forth in the
Constitution." _DaimlerChrysler,_ 547 U.S., at ___, 126 S.Ct., at 1860-1861
(internal quotation marks omitted). In my view, the Court todayaddressing
Article III's "core component of standing," _Defenders of Wildlife, supra,_ at
560, 112 S.Ct. 2130fails to take this limitation seriously.

To be fair, it is not the first time the Court has done so. Today's decision
recalls the previous high-water mark of diluted standing requirements, _United
States v. Students Challenging Regulatory Agency Procedures (SCRAP),_ 412 U.S.
669, 93 S.Ct. 2405, 37 L.Ed.2d 254 (1973). *1471 _SCRAP_ involved "[p]robably
the most attenuated injury conferring Art. III standing" and "surely went to
the very outer limit of the law"until today. _Whitmore,_ 495 U.S., at
158-159, 110 S.Ct. 1717; see also _Lujan v. National Wildlife Federation,_ 497
U.S. 871, 889, 110 S.Ct. 3177, 111 L.Ed.2d 695 (1990) ( _SCRAP_ "has never
since been emulated by this Court"). In _SCRAP,_ the Court based an
environmental group's standing to challenge a railroad freight rate surcharge
on the group's allegation that increases in railroad rates would cause an
increase in the use of nonrecyclable goods, resulting in the increased need
for natural resources to produce such goods. According to the group, some of
these resources might be taken from the Washington area, resulting in
increased refuse that might find its way into area parks, harming the group's
members. 412 U.S., at 688, 93 S.Ct. 2405.

Over time, _SCRAP_ became emblematic not of the looseness of Article III
standing requirements, but of how utterly manipulable they are if not taken
seriously as a matter of judicial self-restraint. _SCRAP_ made standing seem a
lawyer's game, rather than a fundamental limitation ensuring that courts
function as courts and not intrude on the politically accountable branches.
Today's decision is _SCRAP_ for a new generation.[2]

Perhaps the Court recognizes as much. How else to explain its need to devise a
new doctrine of state standing to support its result? The good news is that
the Court's "special solicitude" for Massachusetts limits the future
applicability of the diluted standing requirements applied in this case. The
bad news is that the Court's self-professed relaxation of those Article III
requirements has caused us to transgress "the properand properly limitedrole
of the courts in a democratic society." _Allen,_ 468 U.S., at 750, 104 S.Ct.
3315 (internal quotation marks omitted).

I respectfully dissent.

Justice SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice THOMAS, and Justice ALITO
join, dissenting.

I join THE CHIEF JUSTICE's opinion in full, and would hold that this Court has
no jurisdiction to decide this case because petitioners lack standing. The
Court having decided otherwise, it is appropriate for me to note my dissent on
the merits.

## I

## A

The provision of law at the heart of this case is § 202(a)(1) of the Clean Air
Act (CAA), which provides that the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) "shall by regulation prescribe. . . standards
applicable to the emission of any air pollutant from any class or classes of
new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle engines, which _in his_ *1472
_judgment_ cause, or contribute to, air pollution which may reasonably be
anticipated to endanger public health or welfare." 42 U.S.C. § 7521(a)(1)
(emphasis added). As the Court recognizes, the statute "condition[s] the
exercise of EPA's authority on its formation of a `judgment.'" _Ante,_ at
1462. There is no dispute that the Administrator has made no such judgment in
this case. See _ante,_ at 1463 ("We need not and do not reach the question
whether on remand EPA must make an endangerment finding"); 68 Fed. 52929
(2003) ("[N]o Administrator has made a finding under any of the CAA's
regulatory provisions that CO2 meets the applicable statutory criteria for
regulation").

The question thus arises: Does anything _require_ the Administrator to make a
"judgment" whenever a petition for rulemaking is filed? Without citation of
the statute or any other authority, the Court says yes. Why is that so? When
Congress wishes to make private action force an agency's hand, it knows how to
do so. See, _e.g.,_ _Brock v. Pierce County,_ 476 U.S. 253, 254-255, 106 S.Ct.
1834, 90 L.Ed.2d 248 (1986) (discussing the Comprehensive Employment and
Training Act (CETA), 92 Stat. 1926, 29 U.S.C. § 816(b) (1976 ed., Supp. V),
which "provide[d] that the Secretary of Labor `shall' issue a final
determination as to the misuse of CETA funds by a grant recipient within 120
days after receiving a complaint alleging such misuse"). Where does the CAA
say that the EPA Administrator is required to come to a decision on this
question whenever a rulemaking petition is filed? The Court points to no such
provision because none exists.

Instead, the Court invents a multiple-choice question that the EPA
Administrator must answer when a petition for rulemaking is filed. The
Administrator must exercise his judgment in one of three ways: (a) by
concluding that the pollutant _does_ cause, or contribute to, air pollution
that endangers public welfare (in which case EPA is required to regulate); (b)
by concluding that the pollutant _does not_ cause, or contribute to, air
pollution that endangers public welfare (in which case EPA is _not_ required
to regulate); or (c) by "provid[ing] some reasonable explanation as to why it
cannot or will not exercise its discretion to determine whether" greenhouse
gases endanger public welfare, _ante,_ at 1462, (in which case EPA is _not_
required to regulate).

I am willing to assume, for the sake of argument, that the Administrator's
discretion in this regard is not entirely unboundedthat if he has no
reasonable basis for deferring judgment he must grasp the nettle at once. The
Court, however, with no basis in text or precedent, rejects all of EPA's
stated "policy judgments" as not "amount[ing] to a reasoned justification,"
_ante,_ at 1463, effectively narrowing the universe of potential reasonable
bases to a single one: Judgment can be delayed _only_ if the Administrator
concludes that "the scientific uncertainty is [too] profound." _Ibid._ The
Administrator is precluded from concluding _for other reasons_ "that it would.
. . be better not to regulate at this time." _Ibid._ [1] Such other
reasonsperfectly valid reasonswere set forth in the agency's statement.

> "We do not believe . . . that it would be either effective or appropriate
> for EPA to establish [greenhouse gas] standards for motor vehicles at this
> time. As described in detail below, the President has laid out a
> comprehensive approach *1473 to climate change that calls for near-term
> voluntary actions and incentives along with programs aimed at reducing
> scientific uncertainties and encouraging technological development so that
> the government may effectively and efficiently address the climate change
> issue over the long term.

> . . . . .

> "[E]stablishing [greenhouse gas] emission standards for U.S. motor vehicles
> at this time would . . . result in an inefficient, piecemeal approach to
> addressing the climate change issue. The U.S. motor vehicle fleet is one of
> many sources of [greenhouse gas] emissions both here and abroad, and
> different [greenhouse gas] emission sources face different technological and
> financial challenges in reducing emissions. A sensible regulatory scheme
> would require that all significant sources and sinks of [greenhouse gas]
> emissions be considered in deciding how best to achieve any needed emission
> reductions.

> "Unilateral EPA regulation of motor vehicle [greenhouse gas] emissions could
> also weaken U.S. efforts to persuade developing countries to reduce the
> [greenhouse gas] intensity of their economies. Considering the large
> populations and growing economies of some developing countries, increases in
> their [greenhouse gas] emissions could quickly overwhelm the effects of
> [greenhouse gas] reduction measures in developed countries. Any potential
> benefit of EPA regulation could be lost to the extent other nations decided
> to let their emissions significantly increase in view of U.S. emissions
> reductions. Unavoidably, climate change raises important foreign policy
> issues, and it is the President's prerogative to address them." 68 Fed.Reg.
> 52929-52931 (footnote omitted).

The Court dismisses this analysis as "rest[ing] on reasoning divorced from the
statutory text." _Ante,_ at 1462. "While the statute does condition the
exercise of EPA's authority on its formation of a `judgment,' . . . that
judgment must relate to whether an air pollutant `cause[s], or contribute[s]
to, air pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public
health or welfare.'" _Ibid._ True but irrelevant. When the Administrator
_makes_ a judgment whether to regulate greenhouse gases, that judgment must
relate to whether they are air pollutants that "cause, or contribute to, air
pollution which may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or
welfare." 42 U.S.C. § 7521(a)(1). But the statute says _nothing at all_ about
the reasons for which the Administrator may _defer_ making a judgmentthe
permissible reasons for deciding not to grapple with the issue at the present
time. Thus, the various "policy" rationales, _ante,_ at 1463, that the Court
criticizes are not "divorced from the statutory text," _ante,_ at 1462, except
in the sense that the statutory text is silent, as texts are often silent
about permissible reasons for the exercise of agency discretion. The reasons
the EPA gave are surely considerations executive agencies _regularly_ take
into account (and _ought_ to take into account) when deciding whether to
consider entering a new field: the impact such entry would have on other
Executive Branch programs and on foreign policy. There is no basis in law for
the Court's imposed limitation.

EPA's interpretation of the discretion conferred by the statutory reference to
"its judgment" is not only reasonable, it is the most natural reading of the
text. The Court nowhere explains why this interpretation is incorrect, let
alone why it is not entitled to deference under _Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v.
Natural Resources Defense_ *1474 _Council, Inc.,_ 467 U.S. 837, 104 S.Ct.
2778, 81 L.Ed.2d 694 (1984). As the Administrator acted within the law in
declining to make a "judgment" for the policy reasons above set forth, I would
uphold the decision to deny the rulemaking petition on that ground alone.

## B

Even on the Court's own terms, however, the same conclusion follows. As
mentioned above, the Court gives EPA the option of determining that the
science is too uncertain to allow it to form a "judgment" as to whether
greenhouse gases endanger public welfare. Attached to this option (on what
basis is unclear) is an essay requirement: "If," the Court says, "the
scientific uncertainty is so profound that it precludes EPA from making a
reasoned judgment as to whether greenhouse gases contribute to global warming,
EPA must say so." _Ante,_ at 1463. But EPA _has_ said precisely thatand at
great length, based on information contained in a 2001 report by the National
Research Council (NRC) entitled Climate Change Science: An Analysis of Some
Key Questions:

> "As the NRC noted in its report, concentrations of [greenhouse gases (GHGs)]
> are increasing in the atmosphere as a result of human activities (pp. 9-12).
> It also noted that `[a] diverse array of evidence points to a warming of
> global surface air temperatures' (p. 16). The report goes on to state,
> however, that `[b]ecause of the large and still uncertain level of natural
> variability inherent in the climate record and the uncertainties in the time
> histories of the various forcing agents (and particularly aerosols), a
> [causal] linkage between the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere
> and the observed climate changes during the 20th century cannot be
> unequivocally established. The fact that the magnitude of the observed
> warming is large in comparison to natural variability as simulated in
> climate models is suggestive of such a linkage, but it does not constitute
> proof of one because the model simulations could be deficient in natural
> variability on the decadal to century time scale' (p. 17).

> "The NRC also observed that `there is considerable uncertainty in current
> understanding of how the climate system varies naturally and reacts to
> emissions of [GHGs] and aerosols' (p. 1). As a result of that uncertainty,
> the NRC cautioned that `current estimate of the magnitude of future warming
> should be regarded as tentative and subject to future adjustments (either
> upward or downward).' _Id._ It further advised that `[r]educing the wide
> range of uncertainty inherent in current model predictions of global climate
> change will require major advances in understanding and modeling of both (1)
> the factors that determine atmospheric concentrations of [GHGs] and aerosols
> and (2) the so-called "feedbacks" that determine the sensitivity of the
> climate system to a prescribed increase in [GHGs].' _Id._

> "The science of climate change is extraordinarily complex and still
> evolving. Although there have been substantial advances in climate change
> science, there continue to be important uncertainties in our understanding
> of the factors that may affect future climate change and how it should be
> addressed. As the NRC explained, predicting future climate change
> necessarily involves a complex web of economic and physical factors
> including: Our ability to predict future global anthropogenic emissions of
> GHGs and aerosols; the fate of these emissions once they enter the
> atmosphere ( _e.g.,_ what percentage are absorbed *1475 by vegetation or are
> taken up by the oceans); the impact of those emissions that remain in the
> atmosphere on the radiative properties of the atmosphere; changes in
> critically important climate feedbacks ( _e.g.,_ changes in cloud cover and
> ocean circulation); changes in temperature characteristics ( _e.g.,_ average
> temperatures, shifts in daytime and evening temperatures); changes in other
> climatic parameters ( _e.g.,_ shifts in precipitation, storms); and
> ultimately the impact of such changes on human health and welfare ( _e.g.,_
> increases or decreases in agricultural productivity, human health impacts).
> The NRC noted, in particular, that `[t]he understanding of the relationships
> between weather/climate and human health is in its infancy and therefore the
> health consequences of climate change are poorly understood' (p. 20).
> Substantial scientific uncertainties limit our ability to assess each of
> these factors and to separate out those changes resulting from natural
> variability from those that are directly the result of increases in
> anthropogenic GHGs.

> "Reducing the wide range of uncertainty inherent in current model
> predictions will require major advances in understanding and modeling of the
> factors that determine atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and
> aerosols, and the processes that determine the sensitivity of the climate
> system." 68 Fed.Reg. 52930.

I simply cannot conceive of what else the Court would like EPA to say.

## II

## A

Even before reaching its discussion of the word "judgment," the Court makes
another significant error when it concludes that "§ 202(a)(1) of the Clean Air
Act _authorizes_ EPA to regulate greenhouse gas emissions from new motor
vehicles in the event that it forms a `judgment' that such emissions
contribute to climate change." _Ante,_ at 1459 (emphasis added). For such
authorization, the Court relies on what it calls "the Clean Air Act's
capacious definition of `air pollutant.'" _Ante,_ at 1460.

"Air pollutant" is defined by the Act as "any air pollution agent or
combination of such agents, including any physical, chemical,. . . substance
or matter which is emitted into or otherwise enters the ambient air." 42
U.S.C. § 7602(g). The Court is correct that "[c]arbon dioxide, methane,
nitrous oxide, and hydrofluorocarbons," _ante,_ at 1462, fit within the second
half of that definition: They are "physical, chemical,. . . substance[s] or
matter which [are] emitted into or otherwise ente[r] the ambient air." But the
Court mistakenly believes this to be the end of the analysis. In order to be
an "air pollutant" under the Act's definition, the "substance or matter
[being] emitted into . . . the ambient air" must also meet the _first_ half of
the definitionnamely, it must be an "air pollution agent or combination of
such agents." The Court simply pretends this half of the definition does not
exist.

The Court's analysis faithfully follows the argument advanced by petitioners,
which focuses on the word "including" in the statutory definition of "air
pollutant." See Brief for Petitioners 13-14. As that argument goes, anything
that _follows_ the word "including" must necessarily be a subset of whatever
_precedes_ it. Thus, if greenhouse gases qualify under the phrase following
the word "including," they must qualify under the phrase preceding it. Since
greenhouse gases come within the capacious phrase "any physical, chemical,. .
. substance or matter which is emitted into or otherwise enters the ambient
air," *1476 they must also be "air pollution agent[s] or combination[s] of
such agents," and therefore meet the definition of "air pollutant[s]."

That is certainly one possible interpretation of the statutory definition. The
word "including" can indeed indicate that what follows will be an
"illustrative" sampling of the general category that precedes the word.
_Federal Land Bank of St. Paul v. Bismarck Lumber Co.,_ 314 U.S. 95, 100, 62
S.Ct. 1, 86 L.Ed. 65 (1941). Often, however, the examples standing alone are
broader than the general category, and must be viewed as limited in light of
that category. The Government provides a helpful (and unanswered) example:
"The phrase `any American automobile, including any truck or minivan,' would
not naturally be construed to encompass a foreign-manufactured [truck or]
minivan." Brief for Federal Respondent 34. The general principle
enunciatedthat the speaker is talking about _American_ automobilescarries
forward to the illustrative examples (trucks and minivans), and limits them
accordingly, even though in isolation they are broader. Congress often uses
the word "including" in this manner. In 28 U.S.C. § 1782(a), for example, it
refers to "a proceeding in a foreign or international tribunal, including
criminal investigations conducted before formal accusation." Certainly this
provision would not encompass criminal investigations underway in a _domestic_
tribunal. See also, _e.g.,_ 2 U.S.C. § 54(a) ("The Clerk of the House of
Representatives shall, at the request of a Member of the House of
Representatives, furnish to the Member, for official use only, one set of a
privately published annotated version of the United States Code, including
supplements and pocket parts"); 22 U.S.C. § 2304(b)(1) ("the relevant findings
of appropriate international organizations, including nongovernmental
organizations").

In short, the word "including" does not require the Court's (or the
petitioners') result. It is perfectly reasonable to view the definition of
"air pollutant" in its entirety: An air pollutant _can_ be "any physical,
chemical, . . . substance or matter which is emitted into or otherwise enters
the ambient air," but only if it retains the general characteristic of being
an "air pollution agent or combination of such agents." This is precisely the
conclusion EPA reached: "[A] substance does not meet the CAA definition of
`air pollutant' simply because it is a `physical, chemical,. . . substance or
matter which is emitted into or otherwise enters the ambient air.' It must
also be an `air pollution agent.'" 68 Fed.Reg. 52929, n. 3. See also _id.,_ at
52928 ("The root of the definition indicates that for a substance to be an
`air pollutant,' it must be an `agent' of `air pollution'"). Once again, in
the face of textual ambiguity, the Court's application of _Chevron_ deference
to EPA's interpretation of the word "including" is nowhere to be found.[2]
Evidently, the Court defers only to those reasonable interpretations that it
favors.

## B

Using (as we ought to) EPA's interpretation of the definition of "air
pollutant," we must next determine whether greenhouse gases are "agent[s]" of
"air pollution." If so, the statute would authorize *1477 regulation; if not,
EPA would lack authority.

Unlike "air pollutants," the term "air pollution" is not itself defined by the
CAA; thus, once again we must accept EPA's interpretation of that ambiguous
term, provided its interpretation is a "permissible construction of the
statute." _Chevron,_ 467 U.S., at 843, 104 S.Ct. 2778. In this case, the
petition for rulemaking asked EPA for "regulation of [greenhouse gas]
emissions from motor vehicles to reduce the risk of global climate change." 68
Fed.Reg. 52925. Thus, in deciding whether it had authority to regulate, EPA
had to determine whether the concentration of greenhouse gases assertedly
responsible for "global climate change" qualifies as "air pollution." EPA
began with the commonsense observation that the "[p]roblems associated with
atmospheric concentrations of CO2," _id.,_ at 52927, bear little resemblance
to what would naturally be termed "air pollution":

> "EPA's prior use of the CAA's general regulatory provisions provides an
> important context. Since the inception of the Act, EPA has used these
> provisions to address air pollution problems that occur primarily at ground
> level or near the surface of the earth. For example, national ambient air
> quality standards (NAAQS) established under CAA section 109 address
> concentrations of substances in the ambient air and the related public
> health and welfare problems. This has meant setting NAAQS for concentrations
> of ozone, carbon monoxide, particulate matter and other substances in the
> air near the surface of the earth, not higher in the atmosphere. . . . CO2,
> by contrast, is fairly consistent in concentration throughout the world's
> atmosphere up to approximately the lower stratosphere." _Id.,_ at
> 52926-52927.

In other words, regulating the buildup of CO2 and other greenhouse gases in
the upper reaches of the atmosphere, which is alleged to be causing global
climate change, is not akin to regulating the concentration of some substance
that is _polluting_ the _air._

We need look no further than the dictionary for confirmation that this
interpretation of "air pollution" is eminently reasonable. The definition of
"pollute," of course, is "[t]o make or render impure or unclean." Webster's
New International Dictionary 1910 (2d ed.1949). And the first three
definitions of "air" are as follows: (1) "[t]he invisible, odorless, and
tasteless mixture of gases which surrounds the earth"; (2) "[t]he body of the
earth's atmosphere; esp., the part of it near the earth, as distinguished from
the upper rarefied part"; (3) "[a] portion of air or of the air considered
with respect to physical characteristics or as affecting the senses." _Id.,_
at 54. EPA's conception of "air pollution"focusing on impurities in the
"ambient air" "at ground level or near the surface of the earth"is perfectly
consistent with the natural meaning of that term.

In the end, EPA concluded that since "CAA authorization to regulate is
generally based on a finding that an air pollutant causes or contributes to
air pollution," 68 Fed.Reg. 52928, the concentrations of CO2 and other
greenhouse gases allegedly affecting the global climate are beyond the scope
of CAA's authorization to regulate. "[T]he term `air pollution' as used in the
regulatory provisions cannot be interpreted to encompass global climate
change." _Ibid._ Once again, the Court utterly fails to explain why this
interpretation is incorrect, let alone so unreasonable as to be unworthy of
_Chevron_ deference.

## * * *

The Court's alarm over global warming may or may not be justified, but it
ought *1478 not distort the outcome of this litigation. This is a
straightforward administrative-law case, in which Congress has passed a
malleable statute giving broad discretion, not to us but to an executive
agency. No matter how important the underlying policy issues at stake, this
Court has no business substituting its own desired outcome for the reasoned
judgment of the responsible agency.

## NOTES

[1] Pet. for Cert. 22.

[2] California, Connecticut, Illinois, Maine, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New
Mexico, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Washington.

[3] District of Columbia, American Samoa, New York City, and Baltimore.

[4] Center for Biological Diversity, Center for Food Safety, Conservation Law
Foundation, Environmental Advocates, Environmental Defense, Friends of the
Earth, Greenpeace, International Center for Technology Assessment, National
Environmental Trust, Natural Resources Defense Council, Sierra Club, Union of
Concerned Scientists, and U.S. Public Interest Research Group.

[5] Alaska, Idaho, Kansas, Michigan, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South
Dakota, Texas, and Utah.

[6] Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, National Automobile Dealers
Association, Engine Manufacturers Association, Truck Manufacturers
Association, CO2 Litigation Group, and Utility Air Regulatory Group.

[7] The 1970 version of § 202(a)(1) used the phrase "which endangers the
public health or welfare" rather than the more-protective "which may
reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare." See § 6(a) of
the Clean Air Amendments of 1970, 84 Stat. 1690. Congress amended § 202(a)(1)
in 1977 to give its approval to the decision in _Ethyl Corp. v. EPA,_ 541 F.2d
1, 25 (C.A.D.C. 1976) (en banc), which held that the Clean Air Act "and common
sense ... demand regulatory action to prevent harm, even if the regulator is
less than certain that harm is otherwise inevitable." See § 401(d)(1) of the
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977, 91 Stat. 791; see also H.R.Rep. No. 95-294,
p. 49 (1977), U.S. Code Cong. & Admin.News 1977, p. 1077.

[8] The Council on Environmental Quality had issued a report in 1970
concluding that "[m]an may be changing his weather." Environmental Quality:
The First Annual Report 93. Considerable uncertainty remained in those early
years, and the issue went largely unmentioned in the congressional debate over
the enactment of the Clean Air Act. But see 116 Cong. Rec. 32914 (1970)
(statement of Sen. Boggs referring to Council's conclusion that "[a]ir
pollution alters the climate and may produce global changes in temperature").

[9] See Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2001:
Synthesis Report, pp. 202-203 (2001). By drilling through thick Antarctic ice
sheets and extracting "cores," scientists can examine ice from long ago and
extract small samples of ancient air. That air can then be analyzed, yielding
estimates of carbon dioxide levels. _Ibid._

[10] A more dramatic rise was yet to come: In 2006, carbon dioxide levels
reached 382 parts per million, see Dept. of Commerce, National Oceanic &
Atmospheric Administration, Mauna Loa CO2 Monthly Mean Data,
www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/co2_mm_mlo.dat (all Internet materials as
visited Mar. 29, 2007, and available in Clerk of Court's case file), a level
thought to exceed the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere at any
point over the past 20-million years. See Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, Technical Summary of Working Group I Report 39 (2001).

[11] Climate Research Board, Carbon Dioxide and Climate: A Scientific
Assessment, p. vii (1979).

[12] IPCC, Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment, p. xi (J. Houghton,
G. Jenkins, & J. Ephraums eds. 1991).

[13] The industrialized countries listed in Annex I to the UNFCCC undertook to
reduce their emissions of greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by the year 2000. No
immediate restrictions were imposed on developing countries, including China
and India. They could choose to become Annex I countries when sufficiently
developed.

[14] IPCC, Climate Change 1995, The Science of Climate Change, p. 4.

[15] Alliance for Sustainable Communities; Applied Power Technologies, Inc.;
Bio Fuels America; The California Solar Energy Industries Assn.; Clements
Environmental Corp.; Environmental Advocates; Environmental and Energy Study
Institute; Friends of the Earth; Full Circle Energy Project, Inc.; The Green
Party of Rhode Island; Greenpeace USA; International Center for Technology
Assessment; Network for Environmental and Economic Responsibility of the
United Church of Christ; New Jersey Environmental Watch; New Mexico Solar
Energy Assn.; Oregon Environmental Council; Public Citizen; Solar Energy
Industries Assn.; The SUN DAY Campaign. See App. 7-11.

[16] See 42 U.S.C. § 7607(b)(1) ("A petition for review of action of the
Administrator in promulgating any ... standard under section 7521 of this
title ... or final action taken, by the Administrator under this chapter may
be filed only in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia").

[17] THE CHIEF JUSTICE accuses the Court of misreading _Georgia v. Tennessee
Copper Co.,_ 206 U.S. 230, 27 S.Ct. 618, 51 L.Ed. 1038 (1907), see _post,_ at
1464-1465 (dissenting opinion), and "devis[ing] a new doctrine of state
standing," _id.,_ at 1454-1455. But no less an authority than Hart &
Wechsler's The Federal Courts and the Federal System understands _Tennessee
Copper_ as a standing decision. R. Fallon, D. Meltzer, & D. Shapiro, Hart &
Wechsler's The Federal Courts and the Federal System 290 (5th ed.2003).
Indeed, it devotes an entire section to chronicling the long development of
cases permitting States "to litigate as _parens patriae_ to protect quasi-
sovereign interests _i.e.,_ public or governmental interests that concern the
state as a whole." _Id.,_ at 289; see, _e.g.,_ _Missouri v. Illinois,_ 180
U.S. 208, 240-241, 21 S.Ct. 331, 45 L.Ed. 497 (1901) (finding federal
jurisdiction appropriate not only "in cases involving boundaries and
jurisdiction over lands and their inhabitants, and in cases directly affecting
the property rights and interests of a state," but also when the "substantial
impairment of the health and prosperity of the towns and cities of the state"
are at stake).

Drawing on _Massachusetts v. Mellon,_ 262 U.S. 447, 43 S.Ct. 597, 67 L.Ed.
1078 (1923), and _Alfred L. Snapp & Son, Inc. v. Puerto Rico ex rel. Barez,_
458 U.S. 592, 102 S.Ct. 3260, 73 L.Ed.2d 995 (1982) (citing _Missouri v.
Illinois,_ 180 U.S. 208, 21 S.Ct. 331, 45 L.Ed. 497 (1901)), THE CHIEF JUSTICE
claims that we "overloo[k] the fact that our cases cast significant doubt on a
State's standing to assert a quasi-sovereign interest ... against the Federal
Government." _Post,_ at 1466. Not so. _Mellon_ itself disavowed any such broad
reading when it noted that the Court had been "called upon to adjudicate, not
rights of person or property, not rights of dominion over physical domain,
[and] _not quasi sovereign rights actually invaded or threatened._ " 262 U.S.,
at 484-485, 43 S.Ct. 597 (emphasis added). In any event, we held in _Georgia
v. Pennsylvania R. Co.,_ 324 U.S. 439, 447, 65 S.Ct. 716, 89 L.Ed. 1051
(1945), that there is a critical difference between allowing a State "to
protect her citizens from the operation of federal statutes" (which is what
_Mellon_ prohibits) and allowing a State to assert its rights under federal
law (which it has standing to do). Massachusetts does not here dispute that
the Clean Air Act _applies_ to its citizens; it rather seeks to assert its
rights under the Act. See also _Nebraska v. Wyoming,_ 515 U.S. 1, 20, 115
S.Ct. 1933, 132 L.Ed.2d 1 (1995) (holding that Wyoming had standing to bring a
cross-claim against the United States to vindicate its " _`quasi-sovereign'_
interests which are `independent of and behind the titles of its citizens, in
all the earth and air within its domain'" (quoting _Tennessee Copper,_ 206
U.S., at 237, 27 S.Ct. 618)).

[18] In this regard, MacCracken's 2004 affidavitdrafted more than a year in
advance of Hurricane Katrinawas eerily prescient. Immediately after
discussing the "particular concern" that climate change might cause an
"increase in the wind speed and peak rate of precipitation of major tropical
cyclones (i.e., hurricanes and typhoons)," MacCracken noted that "[s]oil
compaction, sea level rise and recurrent storms are destroying approximately
20-30 square miles of Louisiana wetlands each year. These wetlands serve as a
`shock absorber' for storm surges that could inundate New Orleans,
significantly enhancing the risk to a major urban population." ¶¶ 24-25,
Stdg.App. 217.

[19] "For example, the [Massachusetts Department of Conservation and
Recreation] owns, operates and maintains approximately 53 coastal state parks,
beaches, reservations, and wildlife sanctuaries. [It] also owns, operates and
maintains sporting and recreational facilities in coastal areas, including
numerous pools, skating rinks, playgrounds, playing fields, former coastal
fortifications, public stages, museums, bike trails, tennis courts, boathouses
and boat ramps and landings. Associated with these coastal properties and
facilities is a significant amount of infrastructure, which the Commonwealth
also owns, operates and maintains, including roads, parkways, stormwater pump
stations, pier[s], sea wal[l] revetments and dams." Hoogeboom Decl. ¶ 4, at
171.

[20] See also _id.,_ at 179 (declaration of Christian Jacqz) (discussing
possible loss of roughly 14 acres of land per miles of coastline by 2100);
Kirshen Decl. ¶ 10, at 198 (alleging that "[w]hen such a rise in sea level
occurs, a 10-year flood will have the magnitude of the present 100-year flood
and a 100-year flood will have the magnitude of the present 500-year flood").

[21] In dissent, THE CHIEF JUSTICE dismisses petitioners' submissions as
"conclusory," presumably because they do not quantify Massachusetts' land loss
with the exactitude he would prefer. _Post,_ at 1467-1468. He therefore
asserts that the Commonwealth's injury is "conjectur[al]." See _ibid._ Yet the
likelihood that Massachusetts' coastline will recede has nothing to do with
whether petitioners have determined the precise metes and bounds of their
soon-to-be-flooded land. Petitioners maintain that the seas are rising and
will continue to rise, and have alleged that such a rise will lead to the loss
of Massachusetts' sovereign territory. No one, save perhaps the dissenters,
disputes those allegations. Our cases require nothing more.

[22] See UNFCCC, National Greenhouse Gas Inventory Data for the Period
1990-2004 and Status of Reporting 14 (2006) (hereinafter Inventory Data)
(reflecting emissions from Annex I countries); UNFCCC, Sixth Compilation and
Synthesis of Initial National Communications from Parties not Included in
Annex I to the Convention 7-8 (2005) (reflecting emissions from non-Annex I
countries); see also Dept. of Energy, Energy Information Admin., International
Energy Annual 2004, H.1co2 World Carbon Dioxide Emissions from the Consumption
and Flaring of Fossil Fuels, 1980-2004 (Table),
http://www.eia.doe.gov/pub/international/iealf/tableh1co2.xls.

[23] See also _Mountain States Legal Foundation v. Glickman,_ 92 F.3d 1228,
1234 (C.A.D.C.1996) ("The more drastic the injury that government action makes
more likely, the lesser the increment in probability to establish standing");
_Village of Elk Grove Village v. Evans,_ 997 F.2d 328, 329 (C.A.7 1993)
("[E]ven a small probability of injury is sufficient to create a case or
controversyto take a suit out of the category of the hypotheticalprovided of
course that the relief sought would, if granted, reduce the probability").

[24] In his dissent, THE CHIEF JUSTICE expresses disagreement with the Court's
holding in _United States v. Students Challenging Regulatory Agency Procedures
(SCRAP),_ 412 U.S. 669, 687-688, 93 S.Ct. 2405, 37 L.Ed.2d 254 (1973). He does
not, however, disavow this portion of Justice Stewart's opinion for the Court:

"Unlike the specific and geographically limited federal action of which the
petitioner complained in _Sierra Club_ [v. _Morton,_ 405 U.S. 727, 92 S.Ct.
1361, 31 L.Ed.2d 636 (1972)], the challenged agency action in this case is
applicable to substantially all of the Nation's railroads, and thus allegedly
has an adverse environmental impact on all the natural resources of the
country. Rather than a limited group of persons who used a picturesque valley
in California, all persons who utilize the scenic resources of the country,
and indeed all who breathe its air, could claim harm similar to that alleged
by the environmental groups here. But we have already made it clear that
standing is not to be denied simply because many people suffer the same
injury. Indeed some of the cases on which we relied in _Sierra Club_
demonstrated the patent fact that persons across the Nation could be adversely
affected by major governmental actions. _To deny standing to persons who are
in fact injured simply because many others are also injured, would mean that
the most injurious and widespread Government actions could be questioned by
nobody._ We cannot accept that conclusion." _Ibid._ (citations omitted and
emphasis added).

It is moreover quite wrong to analogize the legal claim advanced by
Massachusetts and the other public and private entities who challenge EPA's
parsimonious construction of the Clean Air Act to a mere "lawyer's game." See
_post,_ at 1471.

[25] See _Department of Housing and Urban Development v. Rucker,_ 535 U.S.
125, 131, 122 S.Ct. 1230, 152 L.Ed.2d 258 (2002) (observing that "`any' ...
has an expansive meaning, that is, one or some indiscriminately of whatever
kind" (some internal quotation marks omitted)).

[26] In dissent, Justice SCALIA maintains that because greenhouse gases
permeate the world's atmosphere rather than a limited area near the earth's
surface, EPA's exclusion of greenhouse gases from the category of air
pollution "agent[s]" is entitled to deference under _Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v.
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc._ 467 U.S. 837, 104 S.Ct. 2778, 81
L.Ed.2d 694 (1984). See _post,_ at 1469-1470. EPA's distinction, however,
finds no support in the text of the statute, which uses the phrase "the
ambient air" without distinguishing between atmospheric layers. Moreover, it
is a plainly unreasonable reading of a sweeping statutory provision designed
to capture " _any_ physical, chemical ... substance or matter which is emitted
into or otherwise enters the ambient air." 42 U.S.C. § 7602(g). Justice SCALIA
does not (and cannot) explain why Congress would define "air pollutant" so
carefully and so broadly, yet confer on EPA the authority to narrow that
definition whenever expedient by asserting that a particular substance is not
an "agent." At any rate, no party to this dispute contests that greenhouse
gases both "ente[r] the ambient air" and tend to warm the atmosphere. They are
therefore unquestionably "agent[s]" of air pollution.

[27] See _United States v. Price,_ 361 U.S. 304, 313, 80 S.Ct. 326, 4 L.Ed.2d
334 (1960) (holding that "the views of a subsequent Congress form a hazardous
basis for inferring the intent of an earlier one"); see also _Cobell v.
Norton,_ 428 F.3d 1070, 1075 (C.A.D.C.2005) ("[P]ost-enactment legislative
history is not only oxymoronic but inherently entitled to little weight").

[28] See, _e.g.,_ National Climate Program Act, § 5, 92 Stat. 601, 15 U.S.C. §
2901 _et seq._ (calling for the establishment of a National Climate Program
and for additional climate change research); Global Climate Protection Act of
1987, § 1103, 101 Stat. 1408-1409 (directing EPA and the Secretary of State to
"jointly" develop a "coordinated national policy on global climate change" and
report to Congress); Global Change Research Act of 1990, Tit. I, 104 Stat.
3097, 15 U.S.C. §§ 2921-2938 (establishing for the "development and
coordination of a comprehensive and integrated United States research program"
to aid in "understand[ing] ... human-induced and natural processes of climate
change"); Global Climate Change Prevention Act of 1990, 104 Stat. 4058, 7
U.S.C. § 6701 _et seq._ (directing the Dept. of Agriculture to study the
effects of climate change on forestry and agriculture); Energy Policy Act of
1992, §§ 1601-1609, 106 Stat. 2999, 42 U.S.C. §§ 13381-13388 (requiring the
Secretary of Energy to report on information pertaining to climate change).

[29] We are moreover puzzled by EPA's roundabout argument that because later
Congresses chose to address stratospheric ozone pollution in a specific
legislative provision, it somehow follows that greenhouse gases cannot be air
pollutants within the meaning of the Clean Air Act.

[1] The Court seems to think we do not recognize that _Tennessee Copper_ is a
case about _parens patriae_ standing, _ante,_ at 1455, n. 17, but we have no
doubt about that. The point is that nothing in our cases (or Hart & Wechsler)
suggests that the prudential requirements for _parens patriae_ standing, see
_Republic of Venezuela v. Philip Morris Inc.,_ 287 F.3d 192, 199, n. (CADC
2002) (observing that " _parens patriae_ is merely a species of prudential
standing" (internal quotation marks omitted)), can somehow substitute for, or
alter the content of, the "irreducible constitutional minimum" requirements of
injury in fact, causation, and redressability under Article III. _Lujan v.
Defenders of Wildlife,_ 504 U.S. 555, 560, 112 S.Ct. 2130, 119 L.Ed.2d 351
(1992).

_Georgia v. Pennsylvania R. Co.,_ 324 U.S. 439, 65 S.Ct. 716, 89 L.Ed. 1051
(1945), is not to the contrary. As the caption makes clear enough, the fact
that a State may assert rights under a federal statute as _parens patriae_ in
no way refutes our clear ruling that "[a] State does not have standing as
_parens patriae_ to bring an action against the Federal Government." _Alfred
L. Snapp & Son, Inc. v. Puerto Rico ex rel. Barez,_ 458 U.S. 592, 610, n. 16,
102 S.Ct. 3260, 73 L.Ed.2d 995 (1982).

[2] The difficulty with _SCRAP,_ and the reason it has not been followed, is
not the portion cited by the Court. See _ante,_ at 1458-1459, n. 24. Rather,
it is the _attenuated_ nature of the injury there, and here, that is so
troubling. Even in _SCRAP,_ the Court noted that what was required was
"something more than an ingenious academic exercise in the conceivable," 412
U.S., at 688, 93 S.Ct. 2405, and we have since understood the allegation there
to have been "that the string of occurrences alleged would happen
_immediately,_ " _Whitmore v. Arkansas,_ 495 U.S. 149, 159, 110 S.Ct. 1717,
109 L.Ed.2d 135 (1990) (emphasis added). That is hardly the case here.

The Court says it is "quite wrong" to compare petitioners' challenging "EPA's
parsimonious construction of the Clean Air Act to a mere `lawyer's game.'"
_Ante,_ at 1458-1459, n. 24. Of course it is not the legal challenge that is
merely "an ingenious academic exercise in the conceivable," _SCRAP, supra,_ at
688, 93 S.Ct. 2405, but the assertions made in support of standing.

[1] The Court's way of putting it is, of course, not quite accurate. The issue
is whether it would be better _to defer the decision about whether to exercise
judgment._ This has the _effect_ of deferring regulation but is quite a
different determination.

[2] Not only is EPA's interpretation reasonable, it is far more plausible than
the Court's alternative. As the Court correctly points out, "all airborne
compounds of whatever stripe," _ante,_ at 1460, would qualify as "physical,
chemical, . . . substance[s] or matter which [are] emitted into or otherwise
ente[r] the ambient air," 42 U.S.C. § 7602(g). It follows that _everything_
airborne, from Frisbees to flatulence, qualifies as an "air pollutant." This
reading of the statute defies common sense.

