# Luther v. Borden

48 U.S. 1 (1849)

Martin Luther, a citizen of the State of Massachusetts, brought an action of
trespass against the defendants, citizens of the State
of Rhode Island, for breaking and entering the house of Luther.

The defendants filed four pleas in justification, averring, in substance,

- An insurrection of men in arms to overthrow the government of the State by
military force

- That, in defence of the government, martial law was declared by the General
Assembly of the State.


- That the plaintiff was aiding and abetting said insurrection. 

- That at the time the trespasses were committed, the State was under martial law, and the
defendants were enrolled in the fourth company of infantry.


- That the defendants were ordered to arrest the plaintiff, and, if necessary,
to break and enter his dwelling-house.

- That it was necessary, and they did break and enter, &c., doing as little
injury as possible, &c., and searched said house, &c.



**Mr. Chief Justice TANEY delivered the opinion of the court.** 

215

This case has arisen out of the unfortunate political differences which
agitated the people of Rhode Island in 1841 and 1842.

216

It is an action of trespass brought by Martin Luther, the plaintiff in error,
against Luther M. Borden and others, the defendants, in the Circuit Court of
the United States for the District of Rhode Island, for breaking and entering
the plaintiff's house. The defendants justify upon the ground that large
numbers of men were assembled in different parts of the State for the purpose
of overthrowing the government by military force, and were actually levying
war upon the State; that, in order to defend itself from this insurrection,
the State was declared by competent authority to be under martial law; that
the plaintiff was engaged in the insurrection; and that the defendants, being
in the military service of the State, by command of their superior officer,
broke and entered the house and searched the rooms for the plaintiff, who was
supposed to be there concealed, in order to arrest him, doing as little damage
as possible. The plaintiff replied, that the trespass was committed by the
defendants of their own proper wrong, and without any such cause; and upon the
issue joined on this replication, the parties proceeded to trial.

The evidence offered by the plaintiff and the defendants is stated at large in
the record; and the questions decided by the Circuit Court, and brought up by
the writ of error, are not such as commonly arise in an action of trespass.
The existence and authority of the government under which the defendants acted
was called in question; and the plaintiff insists, that, before the acts
complained of were committed, that government had been displaced and annulled
by the people of Rhode Island, and that the plaintiff was engaged in
supporting the lawful authority of the State, and the defendants themselves
were in arms against it.

This is a new question in this court, and certainly a very grave one; and at
the time when the trespass is alleged to have been committed it had produced a
general and painful excitement in the State, and threatened to end in
bloodshed and civil war.

The evidence shows that the defendants, in breaking into the plaintiff's house
and endeavouring to arrest him, as stated in the pleadings, acted under the
authority of the government which was established in Rhode Island at the time
of the Declaration of Independence, and which is usually called the charter
government. For when the separation from England took place, Rhode Island did
not, like the other States, adopt a new constitution, but continued the form
of government established by the charter of Charles the Second in 1663; making
only such alterations, by acts of the legislature, as were necessary to adapt
it to their condition and rights as an independent State. It was under this
form of government that Rhode Island united with the other States in the
Declaration of Independence, and afterwards ratified the Constitution of the
United States and became a member of this Union; and it continued to be the
established and unquestioned government of the State until the difficulties
took place which have given rise to this action.

In this form of government no mode of proceeding was pointed out by which
amendments might be made. It authorized the legislature to prescribe the
qualification of voters, and in the exercise of this power the right of
suffrage was confined to freeholders, until the adoption of the constitution
of 1843.

For some years previous to the disturbances of which we are now speaking, many
of the citizens became dissatisfied with the charter government, and
particularly with the restriction upon the right of suffrage. Memorials were
addressed to the legislature upon this subject, urging the justice and
necessity of a more liberal and extended rule. But they failed to produce the
desired effect. And thereupon meetings were held and associations formed by
those who were in favor of a more extended right of suffrage, which finally
resulted in the election of a convention to form a new constitution to be
submitted to the people for their adoption or rejection. This convention was
not authorized by any law of the existing government. It was elected at
voluntary meetings, and by those citizens only who favored this plan of
reform; those who were opposed to it, or opposed to the manner in which it was
proposed to be accomplished, taking no part in the proceedings. The persons
chosen as above mentioned came together and framed a constitution, by which
the right of suffrage was extended to every male citizen of twenty-one years
of age, who had resided in the State for one year, and in the town in which
the offered to vote for six months, next preceding the election. The
convention also prescribed the manner in which this constitution should be
submitted to the decision of the people, permitting every one to vote on that
question who was an American citizen, twenty-one years old, and who had a
permanent residence or home in the State, and directing the votes to be
returned to the convention.

Upon the return of the votes, the convention declared that the constitution
was adopted and ratified by a majority of the people of the State, and was the
paramount law and constitution of Rhode Island. And it communicated this
decision to the governor under the charter government, for the purpose of
being laid before the legislature; and directed elections to be held for a
governor, members of the legislature, and other officers under the new
constitution. These elections accordingly took place, and the governor,
lieutenant-governor, secretary of state, and senators and representatives thus
appointed assembled at the city of Providence on May 3d, 1842, and immediately
proceeded to organize the new government, by appointing the officers and
passing the laws necessary for that purpose.

The charter government did not, however, admit the validity of these
proceedings, nor acquiesce in them. On the contrary, in January, 1842, when
this new constitution was communicated to the governor, and by him laid before
the legislature, it passed resolutions declaring all acts done for the purpose
of imposing that constitution upon the State to be an assumption of the powers
of government, in violation of the rights of the existing government and of
the people at large; and that it would maintain its authority and defend the
legal and constitutional rights of the people.

In adopting this measure, as well as in all others taken by the charter
government to assert its authority, it was supported by a large number of the
citizens of the State, claiming to be a majority, who regarded the proceedings
of the adverse party as unlawful and disorganizing, and maintained that, as
the existing government had been established by the people of the State, no
convention to frame a new constitution could be called without its sanction;
and that the times and places of taking the votes, and the officers to receive
them, and the qualification of the voters, must be previously regulated and
appointed by law.

But, notwithstanding the determination of the charter government, and of those
who adhered to it, to maintain its authority, Thomas W. Dorr, who had been
elected governor under the new constitution, prepared to assert the authority
of that government by force, and many citizens assembled in arms to support
him. The charter government thereupon passed an act declaring the State under
martial law, and at the same time proceeded to call out the militia, to repel
the threatened attack and to subdue those who were engaged in it. In this
state of the contest, the house of the plaintiff, who was engaged in
supporting the authority of the new government, was broken and entered in
order to arrest him. The defendants were, at the time, in the military service
of the old government, and in arms to support its authority.

It appears, also, that the charter government at its session of January, 1842,
took measures to call a convention to revise the existing form of government;
and after various proceedings, which it is not material to state, a new
constitution was formed by a convention elected under the authority of the
charter government, and afterwards adopted and ratified by the people; the
times and places at which the votes were to be given, the persons who were to
receive and return them, and the qualification of the voters, having all been
previously authorized and provided for by law passed by the charter
government. This new government went into operation in May, 1843, at which
time the old government formally surrendered all its powers; and this
constitution has continued ever since to be the admitted and established
government of Rhode Island.

The difficulties with the government of which Mr. Dorr was the head were soon
over. They had ceased before the constitution was framed by the convention
elected by the authority of the charter government. For after an unsuccessful
attempt made by Mr. Dorr in May, 1842, at the head of a military force, to get
possession of the State arsenal at Providence, in which he was repulsed, and
an assemblage of some hundreds of armed men under his command at Chepatchet in
the June following, which dispersed upon the approach of the troops of the old
government, no further effort was made to establish it; and until the
constitution of 1843 went into operation the charter government continued to
assert its authority and exercise its powers, and to enforce obedience,
throughout the State, arresting and imprisoning, and punishing in its judicial
tribunals, those who had appeared in arms against it.

We do not understand from the argument that the constitution under which the
plaintiff acted is supposed to have been in force after the constitution of
May, 1843, went into operation. The contest is confined to the year preceding.
The plaintiff contends that the charter government was displaced, and ceased
to have any lawful power, after the organization, in May, 1842, of the
government which he supported, and although that government never was able to
exercise any authority in the State, nor to command obedience to its laws or
to its officers, yet he insists that it was the lawful and established
government, upon the ground that it was ratified by a large majority of the
male people of the State of the age of twenty-one and upwards, and also by a
majority of those who were entitled to vote for general officers under the
then existing laws of the State. The fact that it was so ratified was not
admitted; and at the trial in the Circuit Court he offered to prove it by the
production of the original ballots, and the original registers of the persons
voting, verified by the oaths of the several moderators and clerks of the
meetings, and by the testimony of all the persons so voting, and by the said
constitution; and also offered in evidence, for the same purpose, that part of
the census of the United States for the year 1840 which applies to Rhode
Island; and a certificate of the secretary of state of the charter government,
showing the number of votes polled by the freemen of the State for the ten
years then last past.

The Circuit Court rejected this evidence, and instructed the jury that the
charter government and laws under which the defendants acted were, at the time
the trespass is alleged to have been committed, in full force and effect as
the form of government and paramount law of the State, and constituted a
justification of the acts of the defendants as set forth in their pleas.

It is this opinion of the Circuit Court that we are now called upon to review.
It is set forth more at large in the exception, but is in substance as above
stated; and the question presented is certainly a very serious one: For, if
this court is authorized to enter upon this inquiry as proposed by the
plaintiff, and it should be decided that the charter government had no legal
existence during the period of time above mentioned, if it had been annulled
by the adoption of the opposing government,--then the laws passed by its
legislature during that time were nullities; its taxes wrongfully collected;
its salaries and compensation to its officers illegally paid; its public
accounts improperly settled; and the judgments and sentences of its courts in
civil and criminal cases null and void, and the officers who carried their
decisions into operation answerable as trespassers, if not in some cases as
criminals.

When the decision of this court might lead to such results, it becomes its
duty to examine very carefully its own powers before it undertakes to exercise
jurisdiction.

Certainly, the question which the plaintiff proposed to raise by the testimony
he effered has not heretofore been recognized as a judicial one in any of the
State courts. In forming the constitutions of the different States, after the
Declaration of Independence, and in the various changes and alterations which
have since been made, the political department has always determined whether
the proposed constitution or amendment was ratified or not by the people of
the State, and the judicial power has followed its decision. In Rhode Island,
the question has been directly decided. Prosecutions were there instituted
against some of the persons who had been active in the forcible opposition to
the old government. And in more than one of the cases evidence was offered on
the part of the defence similar to the testimony offered in the Circuit Court,
and for the same purpose; that is, for the purpose of showing that the
proposed constitution had been adopted by the people of Rhode Island, and had,
therefore, become the established government, and consequently that the
parties accused were doing nothing more than their duty in endeavouring to
support it.

But the courts uniformly held that the inquiry proposed to be made belonged to
the political power and not to the judicial; that it rested with the political
power to decide whether the charter government had been displaced or not; and
when that decision was made, the judicial department would be bound to take
notice of it as the paramount law of the State, without the aid of oral
evidence or the examination of witnesses; that, according to the laws and
institutions of Rhode Island, no such change had been recognized by the
political power; and that the charter government was the lawful and
established government of the State during the period in contest, and that
those who were in arms against it were insurgents, and liable to punishment.
This doctrine is clearly and forcibly stated in the opinion of the Supreme
Court of the State in the trial of Thomas W. Dorr, who was the governor
elected under the opposing constitution, and headed the armed force which
endeavoured to maintain its authority. Indeed, we do not see how the question
could be tried and judicially decided in a State court. Judicial power
presupposes an established government capable of enacting laws and enforcing
their execution, and of appointing judges to expound and administer them. The
acceptance of the judicial office is a recognition of the authority of the
government from which it is derived. And if the authority of that government
is annulled and overthrown, the power of its courts and other officers is
annulled with it. And if a State court should enter upon the inquiry proposed
in this case, and should come to the conclusion that the government under
which it acted had been put aside and displaced by an opposing government, it
would cease to be a court, and be incapable of pronouncing a judicial decision
upon the question it undertook to try. If it decides at all as a court, it
necessarily affirms the existence and authority of the government under which
it is exercising judicial power.

It is worthy of remark, however, when we are referring to the authority of
State decisions, that the trial of Thomas W. Dorr took place after the
constitution of 1843 went into operation. The judges who decided that case
held their authority under that constitution; and it is admitted on all hands
that it was adopted by the people of the State, and is the lawful and
established government. It is the decision, therefore, of a State court, whose
judicial authority to decide upon the constitution and laws of Rhode Island is
not questioned by either party to this controversy, although the government
under which it acted was framed and adopted under the sanction and laws of the
charter government.

The point, then, raised here has been already decided by the courts of Rhode
Island. The question relates, altogether, to the constitution and laws of that
State; and the well settled rule in this court is, that the courts of the
United States adopt and follow the decisions of the State courts in questions
which concern merely the constitution and laws of the State.

Upon what ground could the Circuit Court of the United States which tried this
case have departed from this rule, and disregarded and overruled the decisions
of the courts of Rhode Island? Undoubtedly the courts of the United States
have certain powers under the Constitution and laws of the United States which
do not belong to the State courts. But the power of determining that a State
government has been lawfully established, which the courts of the State disown
and repudiate, is not one of them. Upon such a question the courts of the
United States are bound to follow the decisions of the State tribunals, and
must therefore regard the charter government as the lawful established
government during the time of this contest.

Besides, if the Circuit Court had entered upon this inquiry, by what rule
could it have determined the qualification of voters upon the adoption or
rejection of the proposed constitution, unless there was some previous law of
the State to guide it? It is the province of a court to expound the law, not
to make it. And certainly it is no part of the judicial functions of any court
of the United States to prescribe the qualification of voters in a State,
giving the right to those to whom it is denied by the written and established
constitution and laws of the State, or taking it away from those to whom it is
given; nor has it the right to determine what political privileges the
citizens of a State are entitled to, unless there is an established
constitution or law to govern its decision.

And if the than existing law of Rhode Island which confined the right of
suffrage to freeholders is to govern, and this question is to be tried by that
rule, how could the majority have been ascertained by legal evidence, such as
a court of justice might lawfully receive? The written returns of the
moderators and clerks of mere voluntary meetings, verified by affidavit,
certainly would not be admissible; nor their opinions who judgments as to the
freehold qualification of the persons who voted. The law requires actual
knowledge in the witness of the fact to which he testifies in a court of
justice. How, then, could the majority of freeholders have been determined in
a judicial proceeding?

The court had not the power to order a census of the freeholders to be taken;
nor would the census of the United States of 1840 be any evidence of the
number of freeholders in the State in 1842. Nor could the court appoint
persons to examine and determine whether every person who had voted possessed
the freehold qualification which the law then required. In the nature of
things, the Circuit Court could not know the name and residence of every
citizen, and bring him before the court to be examined. And if this were
attempted, where would such an inquiry have terminated? And how long must the
people of Rhode Island have waited to learn from this court under what form of
government they were living during the year in controversy?

But this is not all. The question as to the majority is a question of fact. It
depends upon the testimony of witnesses, and if the testimony offered by the
plaintiff had been received, the defendants had the right to offer evidence to
rebut it; and there might, and probably would, have been conflicting testimony
as to the number of voters in the State, and as to the legal qualifications of
many of the individuals who had voted. The decision would, therefore, have
depended upon the relative credibility of witnesses, and the weight of
testimony; and as the case before the Circuit Court was an action at common
law, the question of fact, according to the seventh amendment to the
Constitution of the United States, must have been tried by the jury. In one
case a jury might find that the constitution which the plaintiff supported was
adopted by a majority of the citizens of the State, or of the voters entitled
to vote by the existing law. Another jury in another case might find
otherwise. And as a verdict is not evidence in a suit between different
parties, if the courts of the United States have been jurisdiction contended
for by the plaintiff, the question whether the acts done under the charter
government during the period in contest are valid or not must always remain
unsettled and open to dispute. The authority and security of the State
governments do not rest on such unstable foundations.

Moreover, the Constitution of the United States, as far as it has provided for
an emergency of this kind, and authorized the general government to interfere
in the domestic concerns of a State, has treated the subject as political in
its nature, and placed the power in the hands of that department.

The fourth section of the fourth article of the Constitution of the United
States provides that the United States shall guarantee to every State in the
Union a republican form of government, and shall protect each of them against
invasion; and on the application of the legislature or of the executive (when
the legislature cannot be convened) against domestic violence.

Under this article of the Constitution it rests with Congress to decide what
government is the established one in a State. For as the United States
guarantee to each State a republican government, Congress must necessarily
decide what government is established in the State before it can determine
whether it is republican or not. And when the senators and representatives of
a State are admitted into the councils of the Union, the authority of the
government under which they are appointed, as well as its republican
character, is recognized by the proper constitutional authority. And its
decision is binding on every other department of the government, and could not
be questioned in a judicial tribunal. It is true that the contest in this case
did not last long enough to bring the matter to this issue; and as no senators
or representatives were elected under the authority of the government of which
Mr. Dorr was the head, Congress was not called upon to decide the controversy.
Yet the right to decide is placed there, and not in the courts.

So, too, as relaters to the clause in the above-mentioned article of the
Constitution, providing for cases of domestic violence. It rested with
Congress, too, to determine upon the means proper to be adopted to fulfil this
guarantee. They might, if they had deemed it most advisable to do so, have
placed it in the power of a court to decide when the contingency had happened
which required the federal government to interfere. But Congress thought
otherwise, and no doubt wisely; and by the act of February 28, 1795, provided,
that, 'in case of an insurrection in any State against the government thereof,
it shall be lawful for the President of the United States, on application of
the legislature of such State or of the executive (when the legislature cannot
be convened), to call forth such number of the militia of any other State or
States, as may be applied for, as he may judge sufficient to sufficient to
suppress such insurrection.'

By this act, the power of deciding whether the exigency had arisen upon which
the government of the United States is bound to interfere, is given to the
President. He is to act upon the application of the legislature or of the
executive, and consequently he must determine what body of men constitute the
legislature, and who is the governor, before he can act. The fact that both
parties claim the right to the government cannot alter the case, for both
cannot be entitled to it. If there is an armed conflict, like the one of which
we are speaking, it is a case of domestic violence, and one of the parties
must be in insurrection against the lawful government. And the President must,
of necessity, decide which is the government, and which party is unlawfully
arrayed against it, before he can perform the duty imposed upon him by the act
of Congress.

After the President has acted and called out the militia, is a Circuit Court
of the United States authorized to inquire whether his decision was right?
Could the court, while the parties were actually contending in arms for the
possession of the government, call witnesses before it and inquire which party
represented a majority of the people? If it could, then it would become the
duty of the court (provided it came to the conclusion that the President had
decided incorrectly) to discharge those who were arrested or detained by the
troops in the service of the United States or the government which the
President was endeavouring to maintain. If the judicial power extends so far,
the guarantee contained in the Constitution of the United States is a
guarantee of anarchy, and not of order. Yet if this right does not reside in
the courts when the conflict is raging, if the judicial power is at that time
bound to follow the decision of the political, it must be equally bound when
the contest is over. It cannot, when peace is restored, punish as offences and
crimes the acts which it before recognized, and was bound to recognize, as
lawful.

It is true that in this case the militia were not called out by the President.
But upon the application of the governor under the charter government, the
President recognized him as the executive power of the State, and took
measures to call out the militia to support his authority if it should be
found necessary for the general government to interfere; and it is admitted in
the argument, that it was the knowledge of this decision that put an end to
the armed opposition to the charter government, and prevented any further
efforts to establish by force the proposed constitution. The interference of
the President, therefore, by announcing his determination, was as effectual as
if the militia had been assembled under his orders. And it should be equally
authoritative. For certainly no court of the United States, with a knowledge
of this decision, would have been justified in recognizing the opposing party
as the lawful government; or in treating as wrongdoers or insurgents the
officers of the government which the President had recognized, and was
prepared to support by an armed force. In the case of foreign nations, the
government acknowledged by the President is always recognized in the courts of
justice. And this principle has been applied by the act of Congress to the
sovereign States of the Union.

It is said that this power in the President is dangerous to liberty, and may
be abused. All power may be abused if placed in unworthy hands. But it would
be difficult, we think, to point out any other hands in which this power would
be more safe, and at the same time equally effectual. When citizens of the
same State are in arms against each other, and the constituted authorities
unable to execute the laws, the interposition of the United States must be
prompt, or it is of little value. The ordinary course of proceedings in courts
of justice would be utterly unfit for the crisis. And the elevated office of
the President, chosen as he is by the people of the United States, and the
high responsibility he could not fail to feel when acting in a case of so much
moment, appear to furnish as strong safeguards against a wilful abuse of power
as human prudence and foresight could well provide. At all events, it is
conferred upon him by the Constitution and laws of the United States, and must
therefore be respected and enforced in its judicial tribunals.

## Appendix: some flavor from the proceedings below and notes of the reporter

[You just need to skim this stuff. I'd just like you to have some more context for the kinds of claims that were showing up before the Court.]


[*From the ruling of a trial court, quoted in the opinion. The point of the below is that Luther claimed that the trespassers weren't lawful the government of Rhode Island, that in fact the people had made a new constitution.* 

The plaintiff then offered to prove that the said constitution was
adopted by a large majority of the male people of this State, of the age of
twenty-one years and upwards, who were qualified to vote under said
constitution, and also adopted by a majority of the persons entitled to vote
for general officers under the then existing laws of the said State, and
according to the provisions thereof; and that so much of the same as relates
to the election of the officers named in the sixth section of the fourteenth
article of said constitution, on the Monday before the 3d Wednesday of April,
A. D. 1842, to wit, on the 18th day of said April, and all the other parts
thereof on the first Tuesday of May, 1842, to wit, on the 3d day of said May,
and then and there became, and was, the rightful and legal constitution of
said State, and paramount law of said State; and this he offered to prove by
the production of the original votes or ballots cast or polled by the persons
voting for or against the adoption of said constitution, by the production of
the original registers of the persons so voting, verified by the oaths of the
several moderators and clerks of the meetings held for such votings, by the
testimony of all the persons so voting, and by the said constitution.

22d. The plaintiff offered to prove, that, by virtue of, and in conformity
with, the provisions of said constitution, so adopted as aforesaid, the people
of said State entitled to vote for general officers, Senators and
Representatives, to the General Assembly of said State, under said
constitution, did meet, in legal town and ward meetings, on the third
Wednesday of April next preceding the first Tuesday of May, 1842, to wit, on
the 18th day of April, 1842, and did elect duly the officers required by said
constitution for the formation of the government under said constitution; and
that said meetings were conducted and directed according to the provisions of
said constitution and the laws of said State; and this he offered to prove by
the evidence of the moderators and clerks of said meetings, and the persons
present at the same.

23d. The plaintiff offered in evidence that the said general officers, to wit,
the Governor, Lieutenant-Governor, Secretary of State, Senators and
Representatives, all constituting the General Assembly of said State under
said constitution, did assemble in said city of Providence on the first
Tuesday of May, A. D. 1842, to wit, on the 3d day of May, 1842, and did then
and there organize a government for the said State, in conformity with the
provisions and requirements of said constitution, and did elect, appoint, and
qualify officers to carry the said constitution and laws into effect; and, to
prove the same, he offered exemplified copies of the acts and doings of said
General Assembly

Whereupon, the counsel for the plaintiff requested the court to charge the
jury, that, under the facts offered in evidence by the plaintiff, the
constitution and frame of government prepared, adopted, and established in the
manner and form set forth and shown thereby was, and became thereby, the
supreme law of the State of Rhode Island, and was in full force and effect, as
such, during the time set forth in the plaintiff's writ and declaration, when
the trespass alleged therein was committed by the defendants, as admitted in
their pleas.

That a majority of the free white male citizens of Rhode Island, of twenty-one
years and upwards, in the exercise of the sovereignty of the people, through
the forms and in the manner set forth in said evidence, offered to be proved
by the plaintiff, and in the absence, under the then existing frame of
government of the said State of Rhode Island, of any provision therein for
amending, altering, reforming, changing, or abolishing the said frame of
government, had the right to reassume the powers of government, and establish
a written constitution and frame of a republican form of government; and that
having so exercised such right as aforesaid, the pre existing charter
government, and the authority and the assumed laws under which the defendants
in their plea claim to have acted, became null and void and of no effect, so
far as they were repugnant to and conflicted with said constitution, and are
no justification of the acts of the defendants in the premises.

] 

[From plaintiff's filings before the Court: 

And upon these facts the plaintiff in error will maintain, that, by the
fundamental principles of government and of the sovereignty of the people
acknowledged and acted upon in the United States, and the several States
thereof, at least ever since the Declaration of Independence in 1776, the
constitution and frame of government prepared, adopted, and established as
above set forth was, and became thereby, the supreme fundamental law of the
State of Rhode Island, and was in full force and effect, as such, when the
trespass alleged in the plaintiff's writ was committed by the defendants.

That this conclusion also follows from one of the foregoing fundamental
principles of the American system of government, which is, that government is
instituted by the people, and for the benefit, protection, and security of the
people, nation, or community. And that when any government shall be found
inadequate or contrary to these purposes, a majority of the community hath an
indubitable, inalienable, and indefeasible right to reform, alter, or abolish
the same, in such manner as shall be judged most conducive to the public weal.

But that, in the case at bar, the argument is sufficient, even should it limit
the right (which the plaintiff disclaims) to a majority of the voting people,
such majority having, in fact, adopted and affirmed the said constitution of
Rhode Island.

To sustain this general view, the following proposition is submitted as the
theory of American government, upon which the decision of this cause must
depend.

The institution of American liberty is based upon the principles, that the
people are capable of self-government, and have an inalienable right at all
times, and in any manner they please, to establish and alter or change the
constitution or particular form under which that government shall be effected.
This is especially true of the several States composing the Union, subject
only to a limitation provided by the United States Constitution, that the
State governments shall be republican.

In order to support this proposition, we have to establish the following
points:----


1st. That the sovereignty of the people is supreme, and may act in forming
government without the assent of the existing government.

2d. That the people are the sole judges of the form of government best
calculated to promote their safety and happiness.

120

3d. That, as the sovereign power, they have a right to adopt such form of
government.

4th. That the right to adopt necessarily includes the right to abolish, to
reform, and to alter any existing form of government, and to substitute in its
stead any other that they may judge better adapted to the purposes intended.

5th. That if such right exists at all, it exists in the States under the
Union, not as a right of force, but a right of sovereignty; and that those who
oppose its peaceful exercise, and not those who support it, are culpable.

6th. That the exercis of this right, which is a right original, sovereign, and
supreme, and not derived from any other human authority, may be, and must be,
effected in such way and manner as the people may for themselves determine.

7th. And more especially is this true in the case of the then subsisting
government of Rhode Island, which derived no power from the charter or from
the people to alter or amend the frame of government, or to change the basis
of representation, or even to propose initiatory measures to that end.

Upon the foregoing hypothesis, then, the following questions arise:----

1st. Had the people of Rhode Island, in the month of December, 1841, without
the sanction or assent of the Legislature, a right to adopt a State
constitution for themselves, that constitution establishing a government,
republican in form, within the meaning of the Constitution of the United
States?

2d. Was the evidence of the adoption by the people of Rhode Island of such a
constitution, offered in the court below by the plaintiff in this cause,
competent to prove the fact of the adoption of such constitution?

3d. Upon the issuing of the proclamation of the convention, by which it had
been declared duly adopted, namely, on the 13th day of January, 1842, and the
acts under it, did not that constitution become the supreme law of the State
of Rhode Island?

If these questions are answered in the negative, then the theory of American
free governments for the States is unavailable in practice.

If they be answered in the affirmative, then the consequences which
necessarily follow are,----

1st. The charter government was, ipso facto , dissolved by the adoption of
the people's constitution, and by the organization and proceedings of the new
government under the same.

2d. Consequently, the act of March, 1842, 'in relation to offences against the
soevereign power of the State,' and the act 'declaring martial law,' passed
June 24, 1842, were both void.

3d. The act of June, 1842, being void, affords no justification of the acts
complained of in the plaintiff's declaration.

4th. Those acts, by the common law, amount to trespass, the facts being
admitted by the defendants.

] 

135

It has already been said that _Mr. Hallett_ alone argued the case on behalf of
the plaintiff in error, but the Reporter is much at a loss how to give even a
skeleton of the argument, which lasted for three days, and extended over a
great variety of matter. The following points were discussed, and authorities
read.

136

1st. What is a state?

137

Sydney on Government, pp. 15, 24, 349, 399; Locke on Government, B. 2, ch. 8,
§§ 95, 96, &c.; Burgh's Pol. Dis., Vol. I. pp. 3, 4, 6; Vattel, L. N., p. 18;
Virginia Convention, 1775; Wilson's Works, Vol. I. pp. 17, 304, 305;
Federalist, No. 39, p. 150; 2 Dall. Rep. 419, 463, 464; 3 Dall. Rep. 93, 94; 1
Tuck. Bl. Com., App., p. 10; 1 Story's Com. on Const., p. 193, § 208; 1
Elliott's Deb., Gilp. ed., p. 65.

138

2d. What are the people?

139

The early political writers indiscriminately use the words _community,
society, state, nation, body of the community_ , and _great body of the
people_ , to express the same idea, and sometimes the words _the governed_ are
used in the same sense.

140

Sydney on Government, ch. 1, 2, 3; Locke on Government, B. 2, ch. 8, §§ 95 et
seq., ch. 13, &c.; Burgh's Pol. Dis., Vol. I. ch. 2, 3, Vol. III. pp. 275-278;
Vattel, L. N., p. 18; Virginia Convention, 1775, pp. 16, 27, 42, 78;
Declaration of Amer. Ind., &c.; _Trevett v. Weeden,_ Varnum's Argument in
1787; Wilson's Works, Vol. I. pp. 17, 20, 25, 417, 420, Vol. II. p. 128, Vol.
III. p. 291; Federalist, Nos. 1, 7, 14, 21, 22, 39, 40, 63; Virginia
Convention, 1788, pp. 46, 57, 58, 64, 65, 67-70, 79, 87, 95, &c.; 2 Dall. Rep.
448, 449, 452, 454, 458, 470-472; 3 Dall. Rep. 86, 92-94; 1 Tuck. Bl. Com.,
Pt. 1, note at p. 89, App., pp. 4, 9, 87; 1 Cranch, Rep. 176; Helvidius, p. 78
(by Mr. Madison); Rayner's Life of Jefferson, 377, 378; John Taylor, of Car.,
pp. 4, 412, 413, 519, 447; Rawle on the Const., pp. 14-17.

141

He cites Vattel, and uses the word _people_ in the same sense Vattel had used
the word _state_.

142

4 Wheaton's Reports, p. 404; Story's Com. on the Const., Vol. I., B. 2, §§
201-204, &c.; Virginia Convention, 1829, 1830; Debates in Congress,
(Michigan,) Reg. Deb., Vol. XIII. Pt. 1; Everett's Address, Jan. 9, 1836;
Burke's Report.

143

All the American political writers, &c., use the term _people_ to express the
entire numerical aggregate of the community, whether state or national, in
contradistinction to the _government_ or _legislature_.

144

Mr. Burke, in his Report, cited above, says, that 'the (political) people
include all _free white male persons_ of the age of twenty-one years, who are
_citizens_ of the state, are of sound mind, and have not forfeited their right
by some crime against the society of which they are members.'

145

3d. Where resides the ultimate power or sovereignty?

146

Sydney on Government, pp. 70, 349, 436; Locke on Government, p. 316; Burgh's
Pol. Dis., Vol. I. pp. 3, 4, 6, Vol. III. pp. 277, 278, 299, 447; Paine's
Rights of Man, p. 185; Roger Williams on Civil Liberty; Virginia Convention of
1775; Dec. of Amer. Ind.; Wash. Farewell Address; _Trevett v. Weeden,_
Varnum's Argument; Wilson's Works, Vol. I. pp. 17, 21, 25, 415, 417, 418, 420,
Vol. II. p. 128, Vol. III. pp. 277, 278, 299, 447; Federalist, No. 22, p. 87,
No. 39, p. 154, No. 40, p. 158, No. 46, p. 188; Virginia Deb. of 1788, pp. 46,
65, 69, 79, 187, 230, 248, 313; _Chisholm v. Georgia,_ 2 Dall. Rep. 448
(Iredell), 454, 457, 458 (Wilson), 470-472 (Jay), 304 (Patterson); Vanhorne's
Case, 3 Dall. Rep. 93 (Iredell); Doane's Case, 3 Dall. Rep. 93 (Iredell); 1
Tuck. Bl. Com., App., pp. 4, 9, 10; 1 Cranch, Rep. 176; Rayner's Life of
Jefferson, pp. 377, 378; John Taylor, of Car., pp. 412, 413, 489, 490; 4
Wheaton's Rep., p. 404 (Marshall); Rawle on the Const., p. 17; 1 Story's Com.
on the Const., pp. 185, 186, 194, 195, 198-300; Virginia Convention of 1829,
1830; Admission of Michigan (Buchanan, Benton, Strange, Brown, Niles, King,
Vanderpoel, Toucey); Everett's Address, p. 4; 4 Elliott's Deb. 223; R. I.
Declaration of Rights, Art. 2 and 3.


[You get the picture.  I couldn't resist including this stuff to give you a taste of the scope of argument.]

[Now here's some of Defendants' argument: 


The question which the court was called upon to decide was one of sovereignty.
Two legislatures were in existence at the same time. Both could not be
legitimate. If legal power had not passed away from the charter government, it
could not have got into Dorr's. The position taken on the other side is that
it had so passed away, and it is attempted to be proved by votes and
proceedings of meetings, &c., out of doors. This court must look elsewhere,--
to the Constitution and laws, and acts of the government, of the United
States. How did the President of the United States treat this question? Acting
under the Constitution and law of 1795, he decided that the existing
government was the one which he was bound to protect. He took his stand
accordingly, and we say that this is obligatory upon this court, which always
follows an executive recognition of a foreign government. The proof offered
below, and rejected by the court, would have led to a different result. Its
object was to show that the Dorr constitution was adopted by a majority of the
people. But how could a court judge of this? Can it know how many persons were
present, how many of them qualified voters, and all this to be proved by
testimony? Can it order to be brought before it the minutes and registers of
unauthorized officers, and have them proved by parol? The decisions of the
legislature and courts of Rhode Island conclude the case. Will you reverse the
judgment in Dorr's case?

It has been before stated that the government of Mr. Dorr, if it ever existed
at all, only lasted for two days. Even the French revolution, rapid as it was,
required three. During those two days, various officers were appointed; but
did any one ever hear of their proceeding to discharge their several duties? A
court was appointed. But did any process ever issue under its authority? Was
any person ever sued or arrested? Or did any officer, so appointed, venture to
bring his official functions into practical operation upon either men or
property? There was nothing of this. The government was nothing but a shadow.
It was all paper and patriotism; and went out on the 4th of May, admitting
itself to be, what every one must now consider it, nothing but a contemptible
sham.

]

\newpage

