# Baker v. Carr

369 U.S. 186 (1962)

**Mr. Justice BRENNAN delivered the opinion of the Court.**

1

This civil action was brought under 42 U.S.C. §§ 1983 and 1988 to redress the alleged deprivation of federal constitutional
rights. The complaint, alleg[ed] that by means of a 1901 statute of Tennessee
apportioning the members of the General Assembly among the State's 95
counties, 'these plaintiffs and others similarly situated, are denied the
equal protection of the laws accorded them by the Fourteenth Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States by virtue of the debasement of their votes.'

The General Assembly of Tennessee consists of the Senate with 33 members and
the House of Representatives with 99 members. The Tennessee Constitution
provides in Art. II as follows:

> Sec. 3. Legislative authority--Term of office.--The Legislative authority of this State shall be vested in a General Assembly, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives, both dependent on the people; who shall hold their offices for two years from the day of the general election.

> Sec. 4. Census.--An enumeration of the qualified voters, and an apportionment of the Representatives in the General Assembly, shall be made in the year one thousand eight hundred and seventy-one, and within every subsequent term of ten years.

> Sec. 5. Apportionment of representatives.--The number of Representatives shall, at the several periods of making the enumeration, be apportioned among the several counties or districts, according to the number of qualified voters in each; and shall not exceed seventy-five, until the population of the State shall be one million and a half, and shall never exceed ninety-nine; Provided, that any county having two-thirds of the ratio shall be entitled to one member.

> Sec 6. Apportionment of senators.--The number of Senators shall, at the several periods of making the enumeration, be apportioned among the several counties or districts according to the number of qualified electors in each, and shall not exceed one-third the number of representatives. In apportioning the Senators among the different counties, the fraction that may be lost by any county or counties, in the apportionment of members to the House of Representatives, shall be made up to such county or counties in the Senate, as near as may be practicable. When a district is composed of two or more counties, they shall be adjoining; and no county shall be divided in forming a district.'

> Thus, Tennessee's standard for allocating legislative representation among her
counties is the total number of qualified voters resident in the respective
counties, subject only to minor qualifications. Decennial reapportionment in
compliance with the constitutional scheme was effected by the General Assembly
each decade from 1871 to 1901. In 1901 the General Assembly abandoned
separate enumeration in favor of reliance upon the Federal Census and passed
the Apportionment Act here in controversy. In the more than 60 years since
that action, all proposals in both Houses of the General Assembly for
reapportionment have failed to pass.

> Between 1901 and 1961, Tennessee has experienced substantial growth and
redistribution of her population. In 1901 the population was 2,020,616, of
whom 487,380 were eligible to vote.11 The 1960 Federal Census reports the
State's population at 3,567,089, of whom 2,092,891 are eligible to vote. The
relative standings of the counties in terms of qualified voters have changed
significantly. It is primarily the continued application of the 1901
Apportionment Act to this shifted and enlarged voting population which gives
rise to the present controversy.

9

Indeed, the complaint alleges that the 1901 statute, even as of the time of
its passage, 'made no apportionment of Representatives and Senators in
accordance with the constitutional formula * * *, but instead arbitrarily and
capriciously apportioned representatives in the Senate and House without
reference * * * to any logical or reasonable formula whatever.' It is
further alleged that 'because of the population changes since 1900, and the
failure of the Legislature to reapportion itself since 1901,' the 1901 statute
became 'unconstitutional and obsolete.' Appellants also argue that, because of
the composition of the legislature effected by the 1901 Apportionment Act,
redress in the form of a state constitutional amendment to change the entire
mechanism for reapportioning, or any other change short of that, is difficult
or impossible. The complaint concludes that 'these plaintiffs and others
similarly situated, are denied the equal protection of the laws accorded them
by the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States by virtue
of the debasement of their votes.' They seek a declaration that the 1901
statute is unconstitutional and an injunction restraining the appellees from
acting to conduct any further elections under it. They also pray that unless
and until the General Assembly enacts a valid reapportionment, the District
Court should either decree a reapportionment by mathematical application of
the Tennessee constitutional formulae to the most recent Federal Census
figures, or direct the appellees to conduct legislative elections, primary and
general, at large. They also pray for such other and further relief as may be
appropriate.

The District Court was uncertain whether our cases withholding federal
judicial relief rested upon a lack of federal jurisdiction or upon the
inappropriateness of the subject matter for judicial consideration--what we
have designated 'nonjusticiability.' The distinction between the two grounds
is significant. In the instance of nonjusticiability, consideration of the
cause is not wholly and immediately foreclosed; rather, the Court's inquiry
necessarily proceeds to the point of deciding whether the duty asserted can be
judicially identified and its breach judicially determined, and whether
protection for the right asserted can be judicially molded. In the instance of
lack of jurisdiction the cause either does not 'arise under' the Federal
Constitution, laws or treaties (or fall within one of the other enumerated
categories of Art. III, § 2), or is not a 'case or controversy' within the
meaning of that section; or the cause is not one described by any
jurisdictional statute. 




In holding that the subject matter of this suit was not justiciable, the
District Court relied on Colegrove v. Green and subsequent per curiam
cases. The court stated: 'From a review of these decisions there can be no
doubt that the federal rule is that the federal courts will not
intervene in cases of this type to compel legislative reapportionment.'  We understand the District Court to have read the cited cases
as compelling the conclusion that since the appellants sought to have a
legislative apportionment held unconstitutional, their suit presented a
'political question' and was therefore nonjusticiable. We hold that this
challenge to an apportionment presents no nonjusticiable 'political question.'
The cited cases do not hold the contrary.

Of course the mere fact that the suit seeks protection of a political right
does not mean it presents a political question. Such an objection 'is little
more than a play upon words.'  Rather, it is argued that apportionment cases, whatever the
actual wording of the complaint, can involve no federal constitutional right
except one resting on the guaranty of a republican form of government, and
that complaints based on that clause have been held to present political
questions which are nonjusticiable.

We hold that the claim pleaded here neither rests upon nor implicates the
Guaranty Clause and that its justiciability is therefore not foreclosed by our
decisions of cases involving that clause. The District Court misinterpreted
Colegrove v. Green and other decisions of this Court on which it relied.
Appellants' claim that they are being denied equal protection is justiciable,
and if 'discrimination is sufficiently shown, the right to relief under the
equal protection clause is not diminished by the fact that the discrimination
relates to political rights.' To show why we reject the argument based on the Guaranty
Clause, we must examine the authorities under it. But because there appears to
be some uncertainty as to why those cases did present political questions, and
specifically as to whether this apportionment case is like those cases, we
deem it necessary first to consider the contours of the 'political question'
doctrine.

Our discussion, even at the price of extending this opinion, requires review
of a number of political question cases, in order to expose the attributes of
the doctrine--attributes which, in various settings, diverge, combine, appear,
and disappear in seeming disorderliness. Since that review is undertaken
solely to demonstrate that neither singly nor collectively do these cases
support a conclusion that this apportionment case is nonjusticiable, we of
course do not explore their implications in other contexts. That review
reveals that in the Guaranty Clause cases and in the other 'political
question' cases, it is the relationship between the judiciary and the
coordinate branches of the Federal Government, and not the federal judiciary's
relationship to the States, which gives rise to the 'political question.'

We have said that 'In determining whether a question falls within (the
political question) category, the appropriateness under our system of
government of attributing finality to the action of the political departments
and also the lack of satisfactory criteria for a judicial determination are
dominant considerations.'The nonjusticiability of a political question is
primarily a function of the separation of powers. Much confusion results from
the capacity of the 'political question' label to obscure the need for case-
by-case inquiry. Deciding whether a matter has in any measure been committed
by the Constitution to another branch of government, or whether the action of
that branch exceeds whatever authority has been committed, is itself a
delicate exercise in constitutional interpretation, and is a responsibility of
this Court as ultimate interpreter of the Constitution. To demonstrate this
requires no less than to analyze representative cases and to infer from them
the analytical threads that make up the political question doctrine. We shall
then show that none of those threads catches this case.

Foreign relations: There are sweeping statements to the effect that all
questions touching foreign relations are political questions. Not only does
resolution of such issues frequently turn on standards that defy judicial
application, or involve the exercise of a discretion demonstrably committed to
the executive or legislature; but many such questions uniquely demand
single-voiced statement of the Government's views. Yet it is error to
suppose that every case or controversy which touches foreign relations lies
beyond judicial cognizance. Our cases in this field seem invariably to show a
discriminating analysis of the particular question posed, in terms of the
history of its management by the political branches, of its susceptibility to
judicial handling in the light of its nature and posture in the specific case,
and of the possible consequences of judicial action. For example, though a
court will not ordinarily inquire whether a treaty has been terminated, since
on that question 'governmental action must be regarded as of controlling
importance,' if there has been no conclusive 'governmental action' then a
court can construe a treaty and may find it provides the answer. 

While recognition of foreign governments so strongly defies judicial treatment
that without executive recognition a foreign state has been called 'a republic
of whose existence we know nothing,' and the judiciary ordinarily follows
the executive as to which nation has sovereignty over disputed territory,
once sovereignty over an area is politically determined and declared, courts
may examine the resulting status and decide independently whether a statute
applies to that area. Similarly, recognition of belligerency abroad is an
executive responsibility, but if the executive proclamations fall short of an
explicit answer, a court may construe them seeking, for example, to determine
whether the situation is such that statutes designed to assure American
neutrality have become operative.  Still again, though it is the executive
that determines a person's status as representative of a foreign government, the executive's
statements will be construed where necessary to determine the court's
jurisdiction. Similar
judicial action in the absence of a recognizedly authoritative executive
declaration occurs in cases involving the immunity from seizure of vessels
owned by friendly foreign governments. 

46

Dates of duration of hostilities: Though it has been stated broadly that 'the
power which declared the necessity is the power to declare its cessation, and
what the cessation requires,' here too analysis reveals isolable
reasons for the presence of political questions, underlying this Court's
refusal to review the political departments' determination of when or whether
a war has ended. Dominant is the need for finality in the political
determination, for emergency's nature demands 'A prompt and unhesitating
obedience.'  But deference rests on reason, not habit. The question
in a particular case may not seriously implicate considerations of finality--
e.g., a public program of importance (rent control) yet not central to the
emergency effort. Further, clearly definable criteria for decision may be
available. In such case the political question barrier falls away: '(A) Court
is not at liberty to shut its eyes to an obvious mistake, when the validity of
the law depends upon the truth of what is declared.  (It can) inquire
whether the exigency still existed upon which the continued operation of the
law depended.' On the other hand, even in private litigation
which directly implicates no feature of separation of powers, lack of
judicially discoverable standards and the drive for even-handed application
may impel reference to the political departments' determination of dates of
hostilities' beginning and ending. 

Validity of enactments: In Coleman v. Miller, supra, this Court held that the
questions of how long a proposed amendment to the Federal Constitution
remained open to ratification, and what effect a prior rejection had on a
subsequent ratification, were committed to congressional resolution and
involved criteria of decision that necessarily escaped the judicial grasp.
Similar considerations apply to the enacting process: 'The respect due to
coequal and independent departments,' and the need for finality and certainty
about the status of a statute contribute to judicial reluctance to inquire
whether, as passed, it complied with all requisite formalities. But it
is not true that courts will never delve into a legislature's records upon
such a quest: If the enrolled statute lacks an effective date, a court will
not hesitate to seek it in the legislative journals in order to preserve the
enactment. The political
question doctrine, a tool for maintenance of governmental order, will not be
so applied as to promote only disorder.

It is apparent that several formulations which vary slightly according to the
settings in which the questions arise may describe a political question,
although each has one or more elements which identify it as essentially a
function of the separation of powers. Prominent on the surface of any case
held to involve a political question is found a textually demonstrable
constitutional commitment of the issue to a coordinate political department;
or a lack of judicially discoverable and manageable standards for resolving
it; or the impossibility of deciding without an initial policy determination
of a kind clearly for nonjudicial discretion; or the impossibility of a
court's undertaking independent resolution without expressing lack of the
respect due coordinate branches of government; or an unusual need for
unquestioning adherence to a political decision already made; or the
potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious pronouncements by various
departments on one question.

Unless one of these formulations is inextricable from the case at bar, there
should be no dismissal for non-justiciability on the ground of a political
question's presence. The doctrine of which we treat is one of 'political
questions,' not one of 'political cases.' The courts cannot reject as 'no law
suit' a bona fide controversy as to whether some action denominated
'political' exceeds constitutional authority. The cases we have reviewed show
the necessity for discriminating inquiry into the precise facts and posture of
the particular case, and the impossibility of resolution by any semantic
cataloguing.

But it is argued that this case shares the characteristics of decisions that
constitute a category not yet considered, cases concerning the Constitution's
guaranty, in Art. IV, s 4, of a republican form of government. A conclusion as
to whether the case at bar does present a political question cannot be
confidently reached until we have considered those cases with special care. We
shall discover that Guaranty Clause claims involve those elements which define
a 'political question,' and for that reason and no other, they are
nonjusticiable. In particular, we shall discover that the nonjusticiability of
such claims has nothing to do with their touching upon matters of state
governmental organization.

Republican form of government: Luther v. Borden, though in form simply an action for damages for trespass was, as Daniel
Webster said in opening the argument for the defense, 'an unusual case.' The
defendants, admitting an otherwise tortious breaking and entering, sought to
justify their action on the ground that they were agents of the established
lawful government of Rhode Island, which State was then under martial law to
defend itself from active insurrection; that the plaintiff was engaged in that
insurrection; and that they entered under orders to arrest the plaintiff. The
case arose 'out of the unfortunate political differences which agitated the
people of Rhode Island in 1841 and 1842,' and which had
resulted in a situation wherein two groups laid competing claims to
recognition as the lawful government. The plaintiff's right to recover
depended upon which of the two groups was entitled to such recognition; but
the lower court's refusal to receive evidence or hear argument on that issue,
its charge to the jury that the earlier established or 'charter' government
was lawful, and the verdict for the defendants, were affirmed upon appeal to
this Court.

Chief Justice Taney's opinion for the Court reasoned as follows: (1) If a
court were to hold the defendants' acts unjustified because the charter
government had no legal existence during the period in question, it would
follow that all of that government's actions--laws enacted, taxes collected,
salaries paid, accounts settled, sentences passed--were of no effect; and that
'the officers who carried their decisions into operation (were) answerable as
trespassers, if not in some cases as criminals.' There was, of course, no
room for application of any doctrine of de facto status to uphold prior acts
of an officer not authorized de jure, for such would have defeated the
plaintiff's very action. A decision for the plaintiff would inevitably have
produced some significant measure of chaos, a consequence to be avoided if it
could be done without abnegation of the judicial duty to uphold the
Constitution.

(2) No state court had recognized as a judicial responsibility settlement of
the issue of the locus of state governmental authority. Indeed, the courts of
Rhode Island had in several cases held that 'it rested with the political
power to decide whether the charter government had been displaced or not,' and
that that department had acknowledged no change.

(3) Since '(t)he question relates, altogether, to the constitution and laws of
(the) State,' the courts of the United States had to follow the state
courts' decisions unless there was a federal constitutional ground for
overturning them.

(4) No provision of the Constitution could be or had been invoked for this
purpose except Art. IV, § 4, the Guaranty Clause. Having already noted the
absence of standards whereby the choice between governments could be made by a
court acting independently, Chief Justice Taney now found further textual and
practical reasons for concluding that, if any department of the United States
was empowered by the Guaranty Clause to resolve the issue, it was not the
judiciary:

> 'Under this article of the Constitution it rests with Congress to decide what
government is the established one in a State. For as the United States
guarantee to each State a republican government, Congress must necessarily
decide what government is established in the State before it can determine
whether it is republican or not. 


[you already read the rest of this language, go read it again if you need a reminder]

Clearly, several factors were thought by the Court in Luther to make the
question there 'political': the commitment to the other branches of the
decision as to which is the lawful state government; the unambiguous action by
the President, in recognizing the charter government as the lawful authority;
the need for finality in the executive's decision; and the lack of criteria by
which a court could determine which form of government was republican.

But the only significance that Luther could have for our immediate purposes is
in its holding that the Guaranty Clause is not a repository of judicially
manageable standards which a court could utilize independently in order to
identify a State's lawful government. The Court has since refused to resort to
the Guaranty Clause--which alone had been invoked for the purpose--as the
source of a constitutional standard for invalidating state action. See Taylor
& Marshall v. Beckham (No. 1) (claim that Kentucky's resolution of contested gubernatorial election deprived
voters of republican government held nonjusticiable); Pacific States Tel. & T.
Co. v. Oregon (claim that initiative
and referendum negated republican government held nonjusticiable); Kiernan v.
Portland, (claim that municipal
charter amendment per municipal initiative and referendum negated republican
government held nonjusticiable) [etc.]

We come, finally, to the ultimate inquiry whether our precedents as to what
constitutes a nonjusticiable 'political question' bring the case before us
under the umbrella of that doctrine. A natural beginning is to note whether
any of the common characteristics which we have been able to identify and
label descriptively are present. We find none: The question here is the
consistency of state action with the Federal Constitution. We have no question
decided, or to be decided, by a political branch of government coequal with
this Court. Nor do we risk embarrassment of our government abroad, or grave
disturbance at home if we take issue with Tennessee as to the
constitutionality of her action here challenged. Nor need the appellants, in
order to succeed in this action, ask the Court to enter upon policy
determinations for which judicially manageable standards are lacking. Judicial
standards under the Equal Protection Clause are well developed and familiar,
and it has been open to courts since the enactment of the Fourteenth Amendment
to determine, if on the particular facts they must, that a discrimination
reflects no policy, but simply arbitrary and capricious action.

This case does, in one sense, involve the allocation of political power within
a State, and the appellants might conceivably have added a claim under the
Guaranty Clause. Of course, as we have seen, any reliance on that clause would
be futile. But because any reliance on the Guaranty Clause could not have
succeeded it does not follow that appellants may not be heard on the equal
protection claim which in fact they tender. True, it must be clear that the
Fourteenth Amendment claim is not so enmeshed with those political question
elements which render Guaranty Clause claims nonjusticiable as actually to
present a political question itself. But we have found that not to be the case
here.

\newpage

