343 U.S. 579

72 S.Ct. 863

96 L.Ed. 1153

YOUNGSTOWN SHEET & TUBE CO. et al.  
v.  
SAWYER. SAWYER v. YOUNGSTOWN SHEET & TUBE CO. et al.

Nos. 744, 745.

Argued May 12 and May 13, 1952.

Decided June 2, 1952.

[Syllabus from pages 579-581 intentionally omitted]

Mr. John W. Davis, New York City, for Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. et al.

Mr. Solicitor General Philip B. Perlman, Washington, D.C., for Sawyer,
Secretary of Commerce.

Messrs. Clifford D. O'Brien, Chicago, Ill., and Harold C. Heiss, Cleveland,
Ohio, for Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen and Enginemen, et al., as amici
curiae, by special leave of Court.

Mr. Arthur J. Goldberg, Washington, D.C., for United Steelworkers of America,
CIO, as amicus curiae, by special leave of Court.

Mr. Justice BLACK delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

We are asked to decide whether the President was acting within his
constitutional power when he issued an order directing the Secretary of
Commerce to take possession of and operate most of the Nation's steel mills.
The mill owners argue that the President's order amounts to lawmaking, a
legislative function which the Constitution has expressly confided to the
Congress and not to the President. The Government's position is that the order
was made on findings of the President that his action was necessary to avert a
national catastrophe which would inevitably result from a stoppage of steel
production, and that in meeting this grave emergency the President was acting
within the aggregate of his constitutional powers as the Nation's Chief
Executive and the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States.
The issue emerges here from the following series of events:

2

In the latter part of 1951, a dispute arose between the steel companies and
their employees over terms and conditions that should be included in new
collective bargaining agreements. Long-continued conferences failed to resolve
the dispute. On December 18, 1951, the employees' representative, United
Steelworkers of America, C.I.O., gave notice of an intention to strike when
the existing bargaining agreements expired on December 31. The Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service then intervened in an effort to get labor
and management to agree. This failing, the President on December 22, 1951,
referred the dispute to the Federal Wage Stabilization Board1 to investigate
and make recommendations for fair and equitable terms of settlement. This
Board's report resulted in no settlement. On April 4, 1952, the Union gave
notice of a nation-wide strike called to begin at 12:01 a.m. April 9. The
indispensability of steel as a component of substantially all weapons and
other war materials led the President to believe that the proposed work
stoppage would immediately jeopardize our national defense and that
governmental seizure of the steel mills was necessary in order to assure the
continued availability of steel. Reciting these considerations for his action,
the President, a few hours before the strike was to begin, issued Executive
Order 10340, a copy of which is attached as an appendix, post, 72 S.Ct. 868.
The order directed the Secretary of Commerce to take possession of most of the
steel mills and keep them running. The Secretary immediately issued his own
possessory orders, calling upon the presidents of the various seized companies
to serve as operationg managers for the United States. They were directed to
carry on their activities in accordance with regulations and directions of the
Secretary. The next morning the President sent a message to Congress reporting
his action. Cong.Rec., April 9, 1952, p. 3962. Twelve days later he sent a
second message. Cong.Rec., April 21, 1952, p. 4192. Congress has taken no
action.

3

Obeying the Secretary's orders under protest, the companies brought
proceedings against him in the District Court. Their complaints charged that
the seizure was not authorized by an act of Congress or by any constitutional
provisions. The District Court was asked to declare the orders of the
President and the Secretary invalid and to issue preliminary and permanent
injunctions restraining their enforcement. Opposing the motion for preliminary
injunction, the United States asserted that a strike disrupting steel
production for even a brief period would so endanger the well-being and safety
of the Nation that the President had 'inherent power' to do what he had done--
power 'supported by the Constitution, by historical precedent, and by court
decisions.' The Government also contended that in any event no preliminary
injunction should be issued because the companies had made no showing that
their available legal remedies were inadequate or that their injuries from
seizure would be irreparable. Holding against the Government on all points,
the District Court on April 30 issued a preliminary injunction restraining the
Secretary from 'continuing the seizure and possession of the plant * * * and
from acting under the purported authority of Executive Order No. 10340.' 103
F.Supp. 569. On the same day the Court of Appeals stayed the District Court's
injunction. 197 F.2d 582. Deeming it best that the issues raised be promptly
decided by this Court, we granted certiorari on May 3 and set the cause for
argument on May 12. 343 U.S. 937, 72 S.Ct. 775.

4

Two crucial issues have developed: First. Should final determination of the
constitutional validity of the President's order be made in this case which
has proceeded no further than the preliminary injunction stage? Second. If so,
is the seizure order within the constitutional power of the President?

I.

5

It is urged that there were nonconstitutional grounds upon which the District
Court could have denied the preliminary injunction and thus have followed the
customary judicial practice of declining to reach and decide constitutional
questions until compelled to do so. On this basis it is argued that equity's
extraordinary injunctive relief should have been denied because (a) seizure of
the companies' properties did not inflict irreparable damages, and (b) there
were available legal remedies adequate to afford compensation for any possible
damages which they might suffer. While separately argued by the Government,
these two contentions are here closely related, if not identical. Arguments as
to both rest in large part on the Government's claim that should the seizure
ultimately be held unlawful, the companies could recover full compensation in
the Court of Claims for the unlawful taking. Prior cases in this Court have
cast doubt on the right to recover in the Court of Claims on account of
properties unlawfully taken by government officials for public use as these
properties were alleged to have been. See e.g., Hooe v. United States, 218
U.S. 322, 335--336, 31 S.Ct. 85, 89, 54 L.Ed. 1055; United States v. North
American Transportation & Trading Co., 253 U.S. 330, 333, 40 S.Ct. 518, 519,
64 L.Ed. 935. But see Larson v. Domestic & Foreign Commerce Corp., 337 U.S.
682, 701--702, 69 S.Ct. 1457, 1467, 93 L.Ed. 1628. Moreover, seizure and
governmental operation of these going businesses were bound to result in many
present and future damages of such nature as to be difficult, if not
incapable, of measurement. Viewing the case this way, and in the light of the
facts presented, the District Court saw no reason for delaying decision of the
constitutional validity of the orders. We agree with the District Court and
can see no reason why that question was not ripe for determination on the
record presented. We shall therefore consider and determine that question now.

II.

6

The President's power, if any, to issue the order must stem either from an act
of Congress or from the Constitution itself. There is no statute that
expressly authorizes the President to take possession of property as he did
here. Nor is there any act of Congress to which our attention has been
directed from which such a power can fairly be implied. Indeed, we do not
understand the Government to rely on statutory authorization for this seizure.
There are two statutes which do authorize the President to take both personal
and real property under certain conditions.2 However, the Government admits
that these conditions were not met and that the President's order was not
rooted in either of the statutes. The Government refers to the seizure
provisions of one of these statutes (ยง 201(b) of the Defense Production Act)
as 'much too cumbersome, involved, and time-consuming for the crisis which was
at hand.'

7

Moreover, the use of the seizure technique to solve labor disputes in order to
prevent work stoppages was not only unauthorized by any congressional
enactment; prior to this controversy, Congress had refused to adopt that
method of settling labor disputes. When the Taft-Hartley Act was under
consideration in 1947, Congress rejected an amendment which would have
authorized such governmental seizures in cases of emergency.3 Apparently it
was thought that the technique of seizure, like that of compulsory
arbitration, would interfere with the process of collective bargaining.4
Consequently, the plan Congress adopted in that Act did not provide for
seizure under any circumstances. Instead, the plan sought to bring about
settlements by use of the customary devices of mediation, conciliation,
investigation by boards of inquiry, and public reports. In some instances
temporary injunctions were authorized to provide cooling-off periods. All this
failing, unions were left free to strike after a secret vote by employees as
to whether they wished to accept their employers' final settlement offer.5

8

It is clear that if the President had authority to issue the order he did, it
must be found in some provisions of the Constitution. And it is not claimed
that express constitutional language grants this power to the President. The
contention is that presidential power should be implied from the aggregate of
his powers under the Constitution. Particular reliance is placed on provisions
in Article II which say that 'the executive Power shall be vested in a
President * * *'; that 'he shall take Care that the Laws be faithfully
executed'; and that he 'shall be Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of
the United States.'

9

The order cannot properly be sustained as an exercise of the President's
military power as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces. The Government
attempts to do so by citing a number of cases upholding broad powers in
military commanders engaged in day-to-day fighting in a theater of war. Such
cases need not concern us here. Even though 'theater of war' be an expanding
concept, we cannot with faithfulness to our constitutional system hold that
the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces has the ultimate power as such to
take possession of private property in order to keep labor disputes from
stopping production. This is a job for the Nation's lawmakers, not for its
military authorities.

10

Nor can the seizure order be sustained because of the several constitutional
provisions that grant executive power to the President. In the framework of
our Constitution, the President's power to see that the laws are faithfully
executed refutes the idea that he is to be a lawmaker. The Constitution limits
his functions in the lawmaking process to the recommending of laws he tninks
wise and the vetoing of laws he thinks bad. And the Constitution is neither
silent nor equivocal about who shall make laws which the President is to
execute. The first section of the first article says that 'All legislative
Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States * *
*.' After granting many powers to the Congress, Article I goes on to provide
that Congress may 'make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for
carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers and all other Powers vested by
this Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any Department
or Officer thereof.'

11

The President's order does not direct that a congressional policy be executed
in a manner prescribed by Congress--it directs that a presidential policy be
executed in a manner prescribed by the President. The preamble of the order
itself, like that of many statutes, sets out reasons why the President
believes certain policies should be adopted, proclaims these policies as rules
of conduct to be followed, and again, like a statute, authorizes a government
official to promulgate additional rules and regulations consistent with the
policy proclaimed and needed to carry that policy into execution. The power of
Congress to adopt such public policies as those proclaimed by the order is
beyond question. It can authorize the taking of private property for public
use. It can makes laws regulating the relationships between employers and
employees, prescribing rules designed to settle labor disputes, and fixing
wages and working conditions in certain fields of our economy. The
Constitution did not subject this law-making power of Congress to presidential
or military supervision or control.

12

It is said that other Presidents without congressional authority have taken
possession of private business enterprises in order to settle labor disputes.
But even if this be true, Congress has not thereby lost its exclusive
constitutional authority to make laws necessary and proper to carry out the
powers vested by the Constitution 'in the Government of the United States, or
in any Department or Officer thereof.'

13

The Founders of this Nation entrusted the law making power to the Congress
alone in both good and bad times. It would do no good to recall the historical
events, the fears of power and the hopes for freedom that lay behind their
choice. Such a review would but confirm our holding that this seizure order
cannot stand.

14

The judgment of the District Court is affirmed.

15

Affirmed.

16

Mr. Justice FRANKFURTER.

17

Although the considerations relevant to the legal enforcement of the principle
of separation of powers seem to me more complicated and flexible than any
appear from what Mr. Justice BLACK has written, I join his opinion because I
thoroughly agree with the application of the principle to the circumstances of
this case. Even though such differences in attitude toward this principle may
be merely differences in emphasis and nuance, they can hardly be reflected by
a single opinion for the Court. Individual expression of views in reaching a
common result is therefore important.

18

APPENDIX.

Executive Order

19

Directing the Secretary of Commerce to Take Possession of and Operate the
Plants and Facilities of Certain Steel Companies

20

Whereas on December 16, 1950, I proclaimed the existence of a national
emergency which requires that the military, naval, air, and civilian defenses
of this country be strengthened as speedily as possible to the end that we may
be able to repel any and all threats against our national security and to
fulfill our responsibilities in the efforts being made throughout the United
Nations and otherwise to bring about a lasting peace; and

21

Whereas American fighting men and fighting men of other nations of the United
Nations are now engaged in deadly combat with the forces of aggression in
Korea, and forces of the United States are stationed elsewhere overseas for
the purpose of participating in the defense of the Atlantic Community against
aggression; and

22

Whereas the weapons and other materials needed by our armed forces and by
those joined with us in the defense of the free world are produced to a great
extent in this country, and steel is an indispensable component of
substantially all of such weapons and materials; and

23

Whereas steel is likewise indispensable to the carrying out of programs of the
Atomic Energy Commission of vital importance to our defense efforts; and

24

Whereas a continuing and uninterrupted supply of steel is also indispensable
to the maintenance of the economy of the United States, upon which our
military strength depends; and

25

Whereas a controversy has arisen between certain companies in the United
States producing and fabricating steel and the elements thereof and certain of
their workers represented by the United Steelworkers of America, CIO,
regarding terms and conditions of employment; and

26

Whereas the controversy has not been settled through the processes of
collective bargaining or through the efforts of the Government, including
those of the Wage Stabilization Board, to which the controversy was referred
on December 22, 1951, pursuant to Executive Order No. 10233, and a strike has
been called for 12:01 A.M., April 9, 1952; and

27

Whereas a work stoppage would immediately jeopardize and imperil our national
defense and the defense of those joined with us in resisting aggression, and
would add to the continuing danger of our soldiers, sailors, and airmen
engaged in combat in the field; and

28

Whereas is order to assure the continued availability of steel and steel
products during the existing emergency, it is necessary that the United States
take possession of and operate the plants, facilities, and other property of
the said companies as hereinafter provided:

29

Now, therefore, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution
and laws of the United States, and as President of the United States and
Commander in Chief of the armed forces of the United States, it is hereby
ordered as follows:

30

1\. The Secretary of Commerce is hereby authorized and directed to take
possession of all or such of the plants, facilities, and other property of the
companies named in the list attached hereto (List of specific Steel Companies
and Plants omitted), or any part thereof, as he may deem necessary in the
interests of national defense; and to operate or to arrange for the operation
thereof and to do all things necessary for, or incidental to, such operation.

31

2\. In carrying out this order the Secretary of Commerce may act through or
with the aid of such public or private instrumentalities or persons as he may
designate; and all Federal agencies shall cooperate with the Secretary of
Commerce to the fullest extent possible in carrying out the purposes of this
order.

32

3\. The Secretary of Commerce shall determine and prescribe terms and
conditions of employment under which the plants, facilities, and other
properties possession of which is taken pursuant to this order shall be
operated. The Secretary of Commerce shall recognize the rights of workers to
bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing and to
engage in concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining,
adjustment of grievances, or other mutual aid or protection, provided that
such activities do not interfere with the operation of such plants,
facilities, and other properties.

33

4\. Except so far as the Secretary of Commerce shall otherwise provide from
time to time, the managements of the plants, facilities, and other properties
possession of which is taken pursuant to this order shall continue their
functions, including the collection and disbursement of funds in the usual and
ordinary course of business in the names of their respective companies and by
means of any instrumentalities used by such companies.

34

5\. Except so far as the Secretary of Commerce may otherwise direct, existing
rights and obligations of such companies shall remain in full force and
effect, and there may be made, in due course, payments of dividends on stock,
and of principal, interest, sinking funds, and all other distributions upon
bonds, debentures, and other obligations, and expenditures may be made for
other ordinary corporate or business purposes.

35

6\. Whenever in the judgment of the Secretary of Commerce further possession
and operation by him of any plant, facility, or other property is no longer
necessary or expedient in the interest of national defense, and the Secretary
has reason to believe that effective future operation is assured, he shall
return the possession and operation of such plant, facility, or other property
to the company in possession and control thereof at the time possession was
taken under this order.

36

7\. The Secretary of Commerce is authorized to prescribe and issue such
regulations and orders not inconsistent herewith as he may deem necessary or
desirable for carrying out the purposes of this order; and he may delegate and
authorize subdelegation of such of his functions under this order as he may
been desirable.

37

Harry S. Truman.

38

The White House, April 8, 1952.

39

Mr. Justice FRANKFURTER, concurring.

40

Before the cares of the White House were his own, President Harding is
reported to have said that government after all is a very simple thing. He
must have said that, if he said it, as a fleeting inhabitant of fairyland. The
opposite is the truth. A constitutional democracy like ours is perhaps the
most difficult of man's social arrangements to manage successfully. Our scheme
of society is more dependent than any other form of government on knowledge
and wisdom and self-descipline for the achievement of its aims. For our
democracy implies the reign of reason on the most extensive scale. The
Founders of this Nation were not imbued with the modern cynicism that the only
thing that history teaches is that it teaches nothing. They acted on the
conviction that the experience of man sheds a good deal of light on his
nature. It sheds a good deal of light not merely on the need for effective
power, if a society is to be at once cohesive and civilized, but also on the
need for limitations on the power of governors over the governed.

41

To that end they rested the structure of our central government on the system
of checks and balances. For them the doctrine of separation of powers was not
mere theory; it was a felt necessity. Not so long ago it was fashionable to
find our system of checks and balances obstructive to effective government. It
was easy to ridicule that system as outmoded--too easy. The experience through
which the world has passed in our own day has made vivid the realization that
the Framers of our Constitution were not inexperienced doctrinaires. These
long-headed statesmen had no illusion that our people enjoyed biological or
psychological or sociological immunities from the hazards of concentrated
power. It is absurd to see a dictator in a representative product of the
sturdy democratic traditions of the Mississippi Valley. The accretion of
dangerous power does not come in a day. It does come, however slowly, from the
generative force of unchecked disregard of the restrictions that fence in even
the most disinterested assertion of authority.

42

The Framers, however, did not make the judiciary the overseer of our
government. They were familiar with the revisory functions entrusted to judges
in a few of the States and refused to lodge such powers in this Court.
Judicial power can be exercised only as to matters that were the traditional
concern of the courts at Westminster, and only if they arise in ways that to
the expert feel of lawyers constitute 'Cases' or 'Controversies.' Even as to
questions that were the staple of judicial business, it is not for the courts
to pass upon them unless they are indispensably involved in a conventional
litigation. And then, only to the extent that they are so involved. Rigorous
adherence to the narrow scope of the judicial function is especially demanded
in controversies that arouse appeals to the Constitution. The attitude with
which this Court must approach its duty when confronted with such issues is
precisely the opposite of that normally manifested by the general public. So-
called constitutional questions seem to exercise a mesmeric influence over the
popular mind. This eagerness to settle--preferably forever a specific problem
on the basis of the broadest possible constitutional pronouncements may not
unfairly be called one of our minor national traits. An English observer of
our scene has acutely described it: 'At the first sound of a new argument over
the United States Constitution and its interpretation the hearts of Americans
leap with a fearful joy. The blood stirs powerfully in their veins and a new
lustre brightens their eyes. Like King Harry's men before Harfleur, they stand
like greyhounds in the slips, straining upon the start.' The Economist, May
10, 1952, p. 370.

43

The path of duty for this Court, it bears repetition, lies in the opposite
direction. Due regard for the implications of the distribution of powers in
our Constitution and for the nature of the judicial process as the ultimate
authority in interpreting the Constitution, has not only confined the Court
within the narrow domain of appropriate adjudication. It has also led to 'a
series of rules under which it has avoided passing upon a large part of all
the constitutional questions pressed upon it for decision.' Brandeis, J., in
Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley Authority, 297 U.S. 288, 341, 346, 56 S.Ct. 466,
480, 482, 80 L.Ed. 688. A basic rule is the duty of the Court not to pass on a
constitutional issue at all, however narrowly it may be confined, if the case
may, as a matter of intellectual honesty, be decided without even considering
delicate problems of power under the Constitution. It ought to be, but
apparently is not a matter of common understanding that clashes between
different branches of the government should be avoided if a legal ground of
less explosive potentialities is properly available. Constitutional
adjudications are apt by exposing differences to exacerbate them.

44

So here our first inquiry must be not into the powers of the President, but
into the powers of a District Judge to issue a temporary injunction in the
circumstances of this case. Familiar as that remedy is, it remains an
extraordinary remedy. To start with a consideration of the relation between
the President's powers and those of Congress--a most delicate matter that has
occupied the thoughts of statesmen and judges since the Nation was founded and
will continue to occupy their thoughts as long as our democracy lasts--is to
start at the wrong end. A plaintiff is not entitled to an injunction if money
damages would fairly compensate him for any wrong he may have suffered. The
same considerations by which the Steelworkers, in their brief amicus,
demonstrate, from the seizure here in controversy, consequences that cannot be
translated into dollars and cents, preclude a holding that only compensable
damage for the plaintiffs is involved. Again, a court of equity ought not to
issue an injunction, even though a plaintiff otherwise makes out a case for
it, if the plaintiff's right to an injunction is overborne by a commanding
public interest against it. One need not resort to a large epigrammatic
generalization that the evils of industrial dislocation are to be preferred to
allowing illegality to go unchecked. To deny inquiry into the President's
power in a case like this, because of the damage to the public interest to be
feared from upsetting its exercise by him, would in effect always preclude
inquiry into challenged power, which presumably only avowed great public
interest brings into action. And so, with the utmost unwillingness, with every
desire to avoid judicial inquiry into the powers and duties of the other two
branches of the government, I cannot escape consideration of the legality of
Executive Order No. 10340.

45

The pole-star for constitutional adjudications is John Marshall's greatest
judicial utterance that 'it is a constitution we are expounding.' McCulloch v.
Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 407, 4 L.Ed. 579. That requires both a spacious view
in applying an instrument of government 'made for an underfined and expanding
future,' Hurtado v. People of State of California, 110 U.S. 516, 530, 4 S.Ct.
111, 118, 28 L.Ed. 232, and as narrow a delimitation of the constitutional
issues as the circumstances permit. Not the least characteristic of great
statesmanship which the Framers manifested was the extent to which they did
not attempt to bind the future. It is no less incumbent upon this Court to
avoid putting fetters upon the future by needless pronouncements today.

46

Marshall's admonition that 'it is a constitution we are expounding' is
especially relevant when the Court is required to give legal sanctions to an
underlying principle of the Constitution--that of separation of powers. 'The
great ordinances of the Constitution do not establish and divide fields of
black and white.' Holmes, J., dissenting in Springer v. Government of
Philippine Islands, 277 U.S. 189, 209, 48 S.Ct. 480, 485, 72 L.Ed. 845.

47

The issue before us can be met, and therefore should be, without attempting to
define the President's powers comprehensively. I shall not attempt to
delineate what belongs to him by virtue of his office beyond the power even of
Congress to contract; what authority belongs to him until Congress acts; what
kind of problems may be dealt with either by the Congress or by the President
or by both, cf. La Abra Silver Mine Co. v. United States, 175 U.S. 423, 20
S.Ct. 168, 44 L.Ed. 223; what power must be exercised by the Congress and
cannot be delegated to the President. It is as unprofitable to lump together
in an undiscriminating hotch-potch past presidential actions claimed to be
derived from occupancy of the office, as it is to conjure up hypothetical
future cases. The judiciary may, as this case proves, have to intervene in
determining where authority lies as between the democratic forces in our
scheme of government. But in doing so we should be wary and humble. Such is
the teaching of this Court's role in the history of the country.

48

It is in this mood and with this perspective that the issue before the Court
must be approached. We must therefore put to one side consideration of what
powers the President would have had if there had been no legislation whatever
bearing on the authority asserted by the seizure, or if the seizure had been
only for a short, explicitly temporary period, to be terminated automatically
unless Congressional approval were given. These and other questions, like or
unlike, are not now here. I would exceed my authority were I to say anything
about them.

49

The question before the Court comes in this setting. Congress has frequently--
at least 16 times since 1916-- specifically provided for executive seizure of
production, transportation, communications, or storage facilities. In every
case it has qualified this grant of power with limitations and safeguards.
This body of enactments--summarized in tabular form in Appendix I--
demonstrates that Congress deemed seizure so drastic a power as to require
that it be carefully circumscribed whenever the President was vested with this
extraordinary authority. The power to seize has uniformly been given only for
a limited period or for a defined emergency, or has been repealed after a
short period. Its exercise has been restricted to particular circumstances
such as 'time of war or when was is imminent,' the needs of 'public safety' or
of 'national security or defense,' or 'urgent and impending need.' The period
of governmental operation has been limited, as, for instance, to 'sixty days
after the restoration of productive efficiency.' Seizure statutes usually make
executive action dependent on detailed conditions: for example, (a) failure or
refusal of the owner of a plant to meet governmental supply needs or (b)
failure of voluntary negotiations with the owner for the use of a plant
necessary for great public ends. Congress often has specified the particular
executive agency which should seize or operate the plants or whose judgment
would appropriately test the need for seizure. Congress also has not left to
implication that just compensation be paid: it has usually legislated in
detail regarding enforcement of this litigation-breeding general requirement.

50

Congress in 1947 was again called upon to consider whether governmental
seizure should be used to avoid serious industrial shutdowns. Congress decided
against conferring such power generally and in advance, without special
congressional enactment to meet each particular need. Under the urgency of
telephone and coal strikes in the winter of 1946, Congress addressed itself to
the problems raised by 'national emergency' strikes and lockouts.1 The
termination of wartime seizure powers on December 31, 1946, brought these
matters to the attention of Congress with vivid impact. A proposal that the
President be given powers to seize plants to avert a shutdown where the
'health or safety' of the nation was endangered, was thoroughly canvassed by
Congress and rejected. No room for doubt remains that the proponents as well
as the opponents of the bill which became the Labor Management Relations Act
of 1947 clearly understood that as a result of that legislation the only
recourse for preventing a shutdown in any basic industry, after failure of
mediation, was Congress.2 Authorization for seizure as an available remedy for
potential dangers was unequivocally put aside. The Senate Labor Committee,
through its Chairman, explicitly reported to the Senate that a general grant
of seizure powers had been considered and rejected in favor of reliance on ad
hoc legislation, as a particular emergency might call for it.3 An amendment
presented in the House providing that where necessary 'to preserve and protect
the public health and security' the President might seize any industry in
which there is an impending curtailment of production, was voted down after
debate, by a vote of more than three to one.4

51

In adopting the provisions which it did, by the Labor Management Relations Act
of 1947, for dealing with a 'national emergency' arising out of a breakdown in
peaceful industrial relations, Congress was very familiar with Government
seizure as a protective measure. On a balance of considerations Congress chose
not to lodge this power in the President. It chose not to make available in
advance a remedy to which both industry and labor were fiercely hostile.5 In
deciding that authority to seize should be given to the President only after
full consideration of the particular situation should show such legislation to
be necessary, Congress presumably acted on experience with similar industrial
conflicts in the past. It evidently assumed that industrial shutdowns in basic
industries are not instances of spontaneous generation, and that danger
warnings are sufficiently plain before the event to give ample opportunity to
start the legislative process into action.

52

In any event, nothing can be plainer than that Congress made a conscious
choice of policy in a field full of perplexity and peculiarly within
legislative responsibility for choice. In formulating legislation for dealing
with industrial conflicts, Congress could not more clearly and emphatically
have withheld authority than it did in 1947. Perhaps as much so as is true of
any piece of modern legislation, Congress acted with full consciousness of
what it was doing and in the light of much recent history. Previous seizure
legislation had subjected the powers granted to the President to restrictions
of varying degrees of stringency. Instead of giving him even limited powers,
Congress in 1947 deemed it wise to require the President, upon failure of
attempts to reach a voluntary settlement, to report to Congress if he deemed
the power of seizure a needed shot for his locker. The President could not
ignore the specific limitations of prior seizure statutes. No more could he
act in disregard of the limitation put upon seizure by the 1947 Act.

53

It cannot be contended that the President would have had power to issue this
order had Congress explicitly negated such authority in formal legislation.
Congress has expressed its will to withhold this power from the President as
though it had said so in so many words. The authoritatively expressed purpose
of Congress to disallow such power to the President and to require him, when
in his mind the occasion arose for such a seizure, to put the matter to
Congress and ask for specific authority from it, could not be more decisive if
it had been written into ยงยง 206--210 of the Labor Management Relations Act of
1947. Only the other day we treated the Congressional gloss upon those
sections as part of the Act. Amalgamated Ass'n of Street Electric Railway &
Motor Coach Employees v. Wisconsin Employment Relations Board, 340 U.S. 383,
395-- 396, 71 S.CT. 359, 365, 366, 95 L.ED. 364. GRAFTING upon the words a
purpOSE of Congress thus unequivocally expressed is the regular legislative
mode for defining the scope of an Act of Congress. It would be not merely
infelicitous draftsmanship but almost offensive gaucherie to write such a
restriction upon the President's power in terms into a statute rather than to
have it authoritatively expounded, as it was, by controlling legislative
history.

54

By the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, Congress said to the President,
'You may not seize. Please report to us and ask for seizure power if you think
it is needed in a specific situation.' This of course calls for a report on
the unsuccessful efforts to reach a voluntary settlement, as a basis for
discharge by Congress of its responsibility--which it has unquivocally
reserved--to fashion further remedies than it provided.6 But it is now claimed
that the President has seizure power by virtue of the Defense Production Act
of 1950 and its Amendments.7 And the claim is based on the occurrence of new
events--Korea and the need for stabilization, etc.--although it was well known
that seizure power was withheld by the Act of 1947 and although the President,
whose specific requests for other authority were in the main granted by
Congress, never suggested that in view of the new events he needed the power
of seizure which Congress in its judgment had decided to withhold from him.
The utmost that the Korean conflict may imply is that it may have been
desirable to have given the President further authority, a freer hand in these
matters. Absence of authority in the President to deal with a crisis does not
imply want of power in the Government. Conversely the fact that power exists
in the Government does not vest it in the President. The need for new
legislation does not enact it. Nor does it repeal or amend existing law.

55

No authority that has since been given to the President can by any fair
process of statutory construction be deemed to withdraw the restriction or
change the will of Congress as expressed by a body of enactments, culminating
in the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947. Title V of the Defense
Production Act, entitled 'Settlement of Labor Disputes,' pronounced the will
of Congress 'that there be effective procedures for the settlement of labor
disputes affecting national defense,' and that 'primary reliance' be placed
'upon the parties to any labor dispute to make every effort through
negotiation and collective bargaining and the full use of mediation and
conciliation facilities to effect a settlement in the national interest.'8
Section 502 authorized the President to hold voluntary conferences of labor,
industry, and public and government representatives and to 'take such action
as may be agreed upon in any such conference and appropriate to carry out the
provisions of this title,' provided that no action was taken inconsistent with
the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947.9 This provision10 was said by the
Senate Committee on Banking and Currency to contemplate a board similar to the
War Labor Board of World War II and 'a national labor-management conference
such as was held during World War II, when a no-strike, no-lock-out pledge was
obtained.'11 Section 502 was believed necessary in addition to existing means
for settling disputes voluntarily because the Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service could not enter a labor dispute unless requested by one
party.12 Similar explanations of Title V were given in the Conference Report
and by Senator Ives, a member of the Senate Committee to whom Chairman Maybank
during the debates on the Senate floor referred questions relating to Title
V.13 Senator Ives said:

56

'It should be remembered in this connection that during the period of the
present emergency it is expected that the Congress will not adjourn, but at
most, will recess only for very limited periods of time. If, therefore, any
serious work stoppage should arise or even be threatened, in spite of the
terms of the Labor-Management Relations Act of 1947, the Congress would be
readily available to pass such legislation as might be needed to meet the
difficulty.'14

57

The Defense Production Act affords no ground for the suggestion that the 1947
denial to the President of seizure powers has been impliedly repealed, and its
legislative history contradicts such a suggestion. Although the proponents of
that Act recognized that the President would have a choice of alternative
methods of seeking a mediated settlement, they also recognized that Congress
alone retained the ultimate coercive power to meet the threat of 'any serious
work stoppage.'

58

That conclusion is not changed by what occurred after the passage of the 1950
Act. Seven and a half months later, on April 21, 1951, the President by
Executive Order 10233 gave the reconstituted Wage Stabilization Board
authority to investigate labor disputes either (1) submitted voluntarily by
the parties, or (2) referred to it by the President.15 The Board can make only
'recommendations to the parties as to fair and equitable terms of settlement'
unless the parties agree to be bound by the Board's recommendation. About a
month thereafter Sub-Committees of both the House and Senate Labor Committees
began hearings on the newly assigned disputes functions of the Board.16
Amendments to deny the Board these functions were voted down in the House,17
and Congress extended the Defense Production Act without changing Title V in
relevant part.18 The legislative history of the Defense Production Act and its
Amendments in 1951 cannot possibly be vouched for more than Congressional
awareness and tacit approval that the President had charged the Wage
Stabilization Board with authority to seek voluntary settlement of labor
disputes. The most favorable interpretation of the statements in the committee
reports can make them mean no more than 'We are glad to have all the machinery
possible for the voluntary settlement of labor disputes.' In considering the
Defense Production Act Amendments, Congress was never asked to approve--and
there is not the slightest indication that the responsible committees ever had
in mind seizure of plants to coerce settlement of disputes. We are not even
confronted by an inconsistency between the authority conferred on the Wage
Board, as formulated by the Executive Order, and the denial of Presidential
seizure powers under the 1947 legislation. The Board has been given merely
mediatory powers similar to those of agencies created by the Taft-Hartley Act
and elsewhere, with no other sanctions for acceptance of its recommendations
than are offered by its own moral authority and the pressure of public
opinion. The Defense Production Act and the disputes-mediating agencies
created subsequent to it still leave for solution elsewhere the question what
action can be taken when attempts at voluntary settlement fail. To draw
implied approval of seizure power from this history is to make something out
of nothing.

59

It is one thing to draw an intention of Congress from general language and to
say that Congress would have explicitly written what is inferred, where
Congress has not addressed itself to a specific situation. It is quite
impossible, however, when Congress did specifically address itself to a
problem, as Congress did to that of seizure, to find secreted in the
interstices of legislation the very grant of power which Congress consciously
withheld. To find authority so explicitly withheld is not merely to disregard
in a particular instance the clear will of Congress. It is to disrespect the
whole legislative process and the constitutional division of authority between
President and Congress.

60

The legislative history here canvassed is relevant to yet another of the
issues before us, namely, the Government's argument that overriding public
interest prevents the issuance of the injunction despite the illegality of the
seizure. I cannot accept that contention. 'Balancing the equities' when
considering whether an injunction should issue, is lawyers' jargon for
choosing between conflicting public interests. When Congress itself has struck
the balance, has defined the weight to be given the competing interests, a
court of equity is not justified in ignoring that pronouncement under the
guise of exercising equitable discretion.

61

Apart from his vast share of responsibility for the conduct of our foreign
relations, the embracing function of the President is that 'he shall take Care
that the Laws be faithfully executed * * *.' Art. II, ยง 3\. The nature of that
authority has for me been comprehensively indicated by Mr. Justice Holmes.
'The duty of the President to see that the laws be executed is a duty that
does not go beyond the laws or require him to achieve more than Congress sees
fit to leave within his power.' Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52, 177, 47
S.Ct. 21, 85, 71 L.Ed. 160. The powers of the President are not as
particularized as are those of Congress. But unenumerated powers do not mean
undefined powers. The separation of powers built into our Constitution gives
essential content to undefined provisions in the frame of our government.

62

To be sure, the content of the three authorities of government is not to be
derived from an abstract analysis. The areas are partly interacting, not
wholly disjointed. The Constitution is a framework for government. Therefore
the way the framework has consistently operated fairly establishes that it has
operated according to its true nature. Deeply embedded traditional ways of
conducting government cannot supplant the Constitution or legislation, but
they give meaning to the words of a text or supply them. It is an inadmissibly
narrow conception of American constitutional law to confine it to the words of
the Constitution and to disregard the gloss which life has written upon them.
In short, a systematic, unbroken, executive practice, long pursued to the
knowledge of the Congress and never before questioned, engaged in by
Presidents who have also sworn to uphold the Constitution, making as it were
such exercise of power part of the structure of our government, may be treated
as a gloss on 'executive Power' vested in the President by ยง 1 of Art. II.

63

Such was the case of United States v. Midwest Oil Co., 236 U.S. 459, 35 S.Ct.
309, 59 L.Ed. 673. The contrast between the circumstances of that case and
this one helps to draw a clear line between authority not explicitly conferred
yet authorized to be exercised by the President and the denial of such
authority. In both instances it was the concern of Congress under express
constitutional grant to make rules and regulations for the problems with which
the President dealt. In the one case he was dealing with the protection of
property belonging to the United States; in the other with the enforcement of
the Commerce Clause and with raising and supporting armies and maintaining the
Navy. In the Midwest Oil case lands which Congress had opened for entry were,
over a period of 80 years and in 252 instances, and by Presidents learned and
unlearned in the law, temporarily withdrawn from entry so as to enable
Congress to deal with such withdrawals. No remotely comparable practice can be
vouched for executive seizure of property at a time when this country was not
at war, in the only constitutional way in which it can be at war. It would
pursue the irrelevant to reopen the controversy over the constitutionality of
some acts of Lincoln during the Civil War. See J. G. Randall, Constitutional
Problems under Lincoln (Revised ed. 1951). Suffice it to say that he seized
railroads in territory where armed hostilities had already interrupted the
movement of troops to the beleaguered Capitol, and his order was ratified by
the Congress.

64

The only other instances of seizures are those during the periods of the first
and second World Wars.19 In his eleven seizures of industrial facilities,
President Wilson acted, or at least purported to act,20 under authority
granted by Congress. Thus his seizures cannot be adduced as interpretations by
a President of his own powers in the absence of statute.

65

Down to the World War II period, then, the record is barren of instances
comparable to the one before us. Of twelve seizures by President Roosevelt
prior to the enactment of the War Labor Disputes Act in June, 1943, three were
sanctioned by existing law, and six others were effected after Congress, on
December 8, 1941, had declared the existence of a state of war. In this case,
reliance on the powers that flow from declared war has been commendably
disclaimed by the Solicitor General. Thus the list of executive assertions of
the power of seizure in circumstances comparable to the present reduces to
three in the six-month period from June to December of 1941. We need not split
hairs in comparing those actions to the one before us, though much might be
said by way of differentiation. Without passing on their validity, as we are
not called upon to do, it suffices to say that these three isolated instances
do not add up, either in number, scope, duration or contemporaneous legal
justification, to the kind of executive construction of the Constitution
revealed in the Midwest Oil case. Nor do they come to us sanctioned by long-
continued acquiescence of Congress giving decisive weight to a construction by
the Executive of its powers.

66

A scheme of government like ours no doubt at times feels the lack of power to
act with complete, all-embracing, swiftly moving authority. No doubt a
government with distributed authority, subject to be challenged in the courts
of law, at least long enough to consider and adjudicate the challenge, labors
under restrictions from which other governments are free. It has not been our
tradition to envy such governments. In any event our government was designed
to have such restrictions. The price was deemed not too high in view of the
safeguards which these restrictions afford. I know no more impressive words on
this subject than those of Mr. Justice Brandeis:

67

'The doctrine of the separation of powers was adopted by the Convention of
1787, not to promote efficiency but to preclude the exercise of arbitrary
power. The purpose was not to avoid fricition, but, by means of the inevitable
friction incident to the distribution of the governmental powers among three
departments, to save the people from autocarcy.' Myers v. United States, 272
U.S. 52, 240, 293, 47 S.Ct. 21, 85, 71 L.Ed. 160.

68

It is not a pleasant judicial duty to find that the President has exceeded his
powers and still less so when his purposes were dictated by concern for the
Nation's wellbeing, in the assured conviction that he acted to avert danger.
But it would stultify one's faith in our people to entertain even a momentary
fear that the patriotism and the wisdom of the President and the Congress, as
well as the long view of the immediate parties in interest, will not find
ready accommodation for differences on matters which, however close to their
concern and however intrinsically important, are overshadowed by the awesome
issues which confront the world. When at a moment of utmost anxiety President
Washington turned to this Court for advice, and he had to be denied it as
beyond the Court's competence to give, Chief Justice Jay, on behalf of the
Court, wrote thus to the Father of his Country:

69

'We exceedingly regret every event that may cause embarrassment to your
administration, but we derive consolation from the reflection that your
judgment will discern what is right, and that your usual prudence, decision,
and firmness will surmount every obstacle to the preservations of the rights,
peace, and dignity of the United States.' Letter of August 8, 1793, 3
Johnston, Correspondence and Public Papers of John Jay (1891), 489.

70

In reaching the conclusion that conscience compels, I too derive consolation
from the reflection that the President and the Congress between them will
continue to safeguard the heritage which comes to them straight from George
Washington.

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

71

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

72

APPENDIX I - SYNOPTIC ANALYSIS OF LEGISLATION AUTHORIZING SEIZURE OF
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY.

73

STATUTE DURATION SCOPE OF AUTHORITY LIMITATIONS ON ITS EXERCISE TERMS AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT DURING SEIZURE COMPENSATION As Enacted As Extended or
Repealed 1. Railroad and Telegraph Act of 1862, 12 Stat. 334.

74

Enacted 1/31/62; amended, 12 Stat. 625, 7/14/62 Not "in force any longer than
is necessary for the suppression of this rebellion." President may "take
possession of" telegraph lines and railroads; prescribe rules for their
operation; and place all officers and employees under military control. a.
"When in his [the President's] judgment the public safety may require it."

75

b. President may not "engage in any work of railroad construction." None.
President shall appoint three commissioners to assess compensation to which
the company is entitled and to report to Congress for its action. 2. ยง 120 of
National Defense Act of 1916, 39 Stat. 166, 213, 50 U.S.C. ยง 80, as amended.

76

Enacted 6/3/16. No time limit. President, through the head of any department,
may seize any plant and may operate plants through the Army ordnance
Department. a. Exercisable "in time of war or when war is imminent."

77

b. Plant is equipped for making "necessary supplies or equipment for the Army"
or "in the opinion of the Secretary of War" can be transformed readily to such
use.

78

c. Owner refuses to give government order precedence or to perform. None.
Compensation "shall be fair and just." 3. Army Appropriations Act of 1916, 39
Stat. 619,, 645, 10 U.S.C. ยง 1361.

79

Enacted 8/29/16. No time limit. President, through Secretary of War, may take
possession of and utilize any system or part of any system of transportation.
Exercisable "in time of war."* None. Compensation "shall be fair and just." 4.
Naval Emergency Fund Act of 1917, 39 Stat. 1168, 1192 - 1195, 50 U.S.C. ยง 82\.
No time limit. President may:

80

1\. "take over for use or operation" any factory "whether [or not] the United
States has ... agreement with the owner or occupier."

81

2\. "take immediate possession of any factory" producing ships or war material
for the Navy. Exercisable "in time of war" (or of national emergency
determined by the President before 3/1/18).

82

a. Owner fails or refuses to give precedence to an order for "ships or war
material as the necessities of the Government"; refuses to deliver or to
comply with a contract as modified by President.

83

b. Exercisable within "the limits of the amounts appropriated therefor." None.

84

None. President shall determine "just compensation"; if the claimant is
dissatisfied, he shall be paid 50 percent of the amount determined by the
President and may sue, subject to existing law, in the district courts and the
Court of Claims for the rest of "just compensation."

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER.

85

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

86

APPENDIX I - Continued.

87

STATUTE DURATION SCOPE OF AUTHORITY LIMITATIONS ON ITS EXERCISE TERMS AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT DURING SEIZURE COMPENSATION As Enacted As Extended or
Repealed 5. Emergency Shipping Fund Act of 1917, 40 Stat. 182.

88

Enacted 6/15/17. To 6 months after peace with the German Empire, 40 Stat. 182,
183. Repealed after 3 years, ยง 2 (a) (1), 41 Stat. 988, 6/5/20. President may

89

1\. "take over for use or operation" any plant, "whether [or not] United
States has ... agreement with the owner or occupier."

90

2\. "take immediate possession of any ... plant" "equipped for the building or
production of ships or material." Exercisable "within the limits of the
amounts herein authorized."

91

Failure or refusal of owner of ship-building plant to give Government orders
precedence or to comply with order. None.

92

None. Same as next above, except that the prepaid percentage when the owner is
dissatisfied is 75 percent. 6. 1918 Amendments to Emergency Shipping Fund Act
of 1917.

93

A. 40 Stat. 535.

94

Enacted 4/22/18.

95

B. 40 Stat. 1020, 1022.

96

Enacted 11/4/18. To 6 months after peace with the German Empire.

97

To 6 months after peace with the German Empire. Repealed after 2 years, 41
Stat. 988, 6/5/20.

98

Repealed after 1 1/2 years, 41 Stat. 988, 6/5/20. President may

99

1\. "take possession of ... any street railroad."

100

2\. extend seized plants constructing ships or materials therefor and
requisition land for use in extensions. a. The street railroad is necessary
for transporting employees of plants which are or may be hereafter engaged in
"construction of ships or equipment therefor for the United States."

101

b. Exercisable "within the limits of the amounts herein authorized."

102

Exercisable "within the limits of the amounts herein authorized." None.

103

None. Same as next above. 7. Food and Fuel Act of 1917, 40 Stat. 276.

104

Enacted 8/10/17.

105

ยง 10, 40 Stat. 276, 279.

106

ยง 12, 40 Stat. 276, 279. To end of World War I with Germany. President may

107

1\. requisition foods, fuels, feeds, etc., and storage facilities for them.

108

2\. take over any factory, packing house, oil pipe line, mine, or other plant
where any necessaries are or may be "produced, prepared, or mined, and to
operate the same." The requisitioning is "necessary to the support of the Army
or the ... Navy, or any other public use connected with the common defense."

109

a. President finds "it necessary to secure an adequate supply of necessaries
for ... the Army or ... the Navy, or for any other public use connected with
the common defense.."

110

b. President must turn facility back as soon as further Government operation
"is not essential for the national security or defense." None.

111

President may make regulations for "the employment, control, and compensation
of employees." President "shall ascertain and pay a just compensation"; if the
owner is dissatisfied, he shall be paid 75 percent of the amount determined by
the President and may sue in the district courts, which are hereby given
jurisdiction, for the rest of "just compensation."

112

Same as in the Emergency Shipping Fund Act of 1917, _supra._

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

113

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

114

APPENDIX I - Continued.

115

STATUTE DURATION SCOPE OF AUTHORITY LIMITATIONS ON ITS EXERCISE TERMS AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT DURING SEIZURE COMPENSATION As Enacted As Extended or
Repealed Food and Fuel Act of 1917 - Continued.

116

ยง 25, 40 Stat. 276, 284. To end of World War I with Germany. 3. "requisition
and take over the plant, business, and all appurtenances thereof belonging to
such producer or dealer" of coal and coke, and may operate it through an
agency of his choice. Producer or dealer

117

a. Fails to conform to prices or regulations set by the Federal Trade
Commission under the direction of the President, who deems it "necessary for
the efficient prosecution of the war,"

118

or

119

b. Fails to operate efficiently, or conducts business in a way "prejudicial to
the public interest." President may "prescribe ... regulations ... for the
employment, control, and compensation of the employees." Same as next above.
8. Joint Resolution of July 16, 1918, 40 Stat. 904. "during the continuance of
the present war." Terminated on 7/31/19 by repeal, 7/11/19, 41 Stat. 157.
President may "take possession ... of [and operate] any telegraph, telephone,
marine cable or radio system." President deems "it necessary for the national
security or defense." None. Same as next above. 9. ยง 16 of Federal Water Power
Act of 1920, 41 Stat. 1063, 1072, 16 U.S.C. ยง 809.

120

Enacted 6/10/20. No time limit. President may take possession of any project,
dams, power houses, transmission lines, etc., constructed or operated under a
license from the Federal Power Commission and may operate them. a. President
believes, as "evidenced by a written order addressed to the holder of any
license hereunder [that] the safety of the United States demands it."

121

b. Seizure is "for the purpose of manufacturing nitrates, explosives, or
munitions of war, or for any other purpose involving the safety of the United
States."

122

c. Control is limited to the "length of time as may appear to the President to
be necessary to accomplish said purposes." None. Owner shall be paid "just and
fair compensation for the use of said property as may be fixed by the [Federal
Power] commission upon the basis of a reasonable profit in time of peace, and
the cost of restoring said property to as good condition as existed at the
time of the taking over thereof, less the reasonable value of any
improvements... made thereto by the United States and which are valuable and
serviceable to the [owner]." 10. ยง 606 of Communications Act of 1934, 48 Stat.
1064, 1104, 47 U.S.C. ยง 606(c).

123

Enacted 6/19/34. No time limit. President may "use or control ... any such
station and/or its apparatus and equipment by any department of the Government
under such regulations as he may prescribe." a. President proclaims that there
exists

124

(1) war or threat of war or

125

(2) a state of public peril or disaster or other national emergency,

126

or

127

b. It is necessary to preserve the neutrality of the United States. None.
President shall ascertain just compensation and certify it to Congress for
appropriation; if the owner is dissatisfied, he shall be paid 75 percent of
the amount determined by the President and may sue, subject to existing law,
in the district courts and the Court of Claims for the rest of "just
compensation."

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

128

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

129

APPENDIX I - Continued.

130

STATUTE DURATION SCOPE OF AUTHORITY LIMITATIONS ON ITS EXERCISE TERMS AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT DURING SEIZURE COMPENSATION As Enacted As Extended or
Repealed 11. Amendments to Communications Act, 56 Stat. 18, 47 U.S.C. ยง
606(d).

131

Enacted 1/26/42. No time limit. Same power as in ยง 606(c), Communications Act
of 1934, next above. a. President proclaims a state or threat of war.

132

b. President "deems it necessary in the interest of the national security and
defense."

133

c. Power to seize and use property continues to "not later than six months
after the termination of such state or threat of war" or than a date set by
concurrent resolution of Congress. None. Same as next above. 12. ยง 8(b) of
National Defense Act of 1940, 54 Stat. 676, 680.

134

Enacted 6/28/40. No time limit. Repealed in less than 3 months, 9/16/40, 54
Stat. 885, 893. Secretary of Navy, under President's direction, may "take over
and operate such plant or facility." a. Secretary of Navy deems any existing
plant necessary for the national defense.

135

b. He is unable to reach agreement with its owner for its use or operation.
Secretary of Navy may operate the plant "either by Government personnel or by
contract with private firms." Secretary of Navy may "fix the compensation."
13. ยง 9 of Selective Training and Service Act of 1940, 54 Stat. 885, 892, 50
U.S.C. App. (1946 ed.) ยง 309.

136

Enacted 9/16/40; amended 9/16/40; amended by War Labor Disputes Act, 57 Stat.
1673, 164, _q. v., infra._ To 5/15/45, 54 Stat. 885, 897. Extended to 3/31/47,
60 Stat., 341, 342. President may "take immediate possession of any such
plant." (Extended by amendment to "any plant, mine or facility" capable of
producing "any articles or materials which may be required ... or which may be
useful" for the war effort. 57 Stat. 163, 164.) a. Plant is equipped for or
capable of being readily transformed for the manufacture of necessary
supplies.

137

b. Owner refuses to give Government order precedence or to fill it. None. "The
compensation ... shall be fair and just." 14. ยง 3 of War Labor Disputes Act of
1943, 57 Stat. 163, 164, 50 U.S.C. App. *1946 ed.) ยง 1503.

138

Enacted 6/25/43. To termination of this Act by concurrent resolution by
Congress or of hostilities. Plants seized previously may be operated until 6
months after termination of hostilities. President may "take immediate
possession" of "any plant, mine, or facility equipped for the manufacture,
production, or mining of any articles or materials which may be required ...
or which may be useful" for the war effort. a. Finding and proclamation by the
President that

139

(1) there is an interruption on account of a labor disturbance,

140

(2) the war effort will be unduly impeded,

141

(3) seizure is necessary to insure operation.

142

b. Plant must be returned to owner within 60 days "after the restoration of
the productive efficiency." Same "terms and conditions of employment which
were in effect at the time [of taking] possession," except that terms and
conditions might be changed by order of the War Labor Board, on application.
ยงยง 4, 5, 57 Stat. 163, 165. Same as next above.

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

143

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

144

APPENDIX I - Continued.

145

STATUTE DURATION SCOPE OF AUTHORITY LIMITATIONS ON ITS EXERCISE TERMS AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT DURING SEIZURE COMPENSATION As Enacted As Extended or
Repealed 15. Title VIII, "Repricing of War Contracts," of Revenue Act of 1943,
58 Stat. 21, 92, 50 U.S.C. App. (1946 ed.) ยง 1192.

146

Enacted 2/25/44. To termination of hostilities. President may "take immediate
possession of the plant or plants ... and ... operate them in accordance with
section 9 of the Selective Training and Service Act of 1940, as amended." a.
The Secretary of a Department deems the price of an article or service
required directly or indirectly by the Department is unreasonable.

147

b. The Secretary, after the refusal of the person furnishing the article or
service to agree to a price, sets a price.

148

c. The person "willfully refuses, or wilfully fails" to furnish the articles
or services at the price fixed by the Secretary. None. Same as next above. 16.
Selective Service Act of 1948, 62 Stat. 604, 625, 626, 50 U.S.C. App. ยง 468.

149

Enacted 6/24/48. No time limit. President may "take immediate possession of
any plant, mine, or other facility ... and to operate it ... for the
production of such articles or materials." a. President with advice of the
National Security Resources Board determines prompt delivery of articles or
materials is "in the interests of the national security."

150

b. Procurement "has been authorized by the Congress exclusively for the use of
the armed forces" or the A.E.C.

151

c. Owner refuses or fails to give precedence to Government order placed with
notice that it is made pursuant to this section, or to fill the order
properly. None. "Fair and just compensation shall be paid." 17. ยง 201(a) of
Defense Production Act, 64 Stat. 798, 799, 50 U.S.C. App. ยง 2081(a).

152

Enacted 9/8/50; amended, 65 Stat. 131, 132, _q.v., infra._ To 6/30/51. But see
ยง 716(a), 64 Stat. 798, 822. Extended to 7/31/51, 65 Stat. 110.

153

Extended to 6/30/52, ยง 111, 65 Stat. 131, 144. President may "requisition"
"equipment, supplies or component parts thereof, or materials or facilities
necessary for the manufacture, servicing, or operation of such equipment,
supplies or component parts." 64 Stat. 798, 799. Restricted in the main to
personal property by ยง 102(b), 65 Stat. 132. President determines that

154

a. its use is "needed for national defense,"

155

b. the need is "immediate and impending" "will not admit of delay or resort to
any other source of supply,"

156

c. other reasonable means of obtaining use of the property have been
exhausted. None. President shall determine just compensation as of the time
the property is taken; if owner is dissatisfied he shall be promptly paid 75
percent of the amount determined by the President and may sue within three
years in the district courts or the Court of Claims, regardless of the amount
involved, for the rest of "just compensation." 18. ยง 102(b)(2) of Defense
Production Act Amendments of 1951, 65 Stat. 131, 132, 50 U.S.C. App. ยง
2081(b).

157

Enacted 7/31/51. To 6/30/52, 65 Stat. 131, 144. Court condemnation of real
property in accordance with existing statutes. President deems the real
property "necessary in the interest of national defense." None. Under existing
statutes for condemnation. Immediate possession given only upon deposit of
amount "estimated to be just compensation," 75 percent of which is immediately
paid without prejudice to the owner.

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

158

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

159

APPENDIX II. - SUMMARY OF SEIZURES OF INDUSTRIAL PLANTS AND FACILITIES BY THE
PRESIDENT.

160

CIVIL WAR PERIOD.

161

PLANT OR FACILITY SEIZED DURATION OF SEIZURE ORDER EFFECTING SEIZURE AUTHORITY
CITED REASON FOR SEIZURE OPERATIONS DURING SEIZURE From To Railroads and
telegraph lines between Washington and Annapolis, MD.1 4/27/61 (?) Order of
Secretary of War dated 4/27/61 appointing Thomas A. Scott officer in charge.
War of the Rebellion, Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies,
Ser. I, Vol II, 603. None. Communications between Washington and the North
were interrupted by bands of southern sympathizers who destroyed railway and
telegraph facilities. Northern troops guarded railway and telegraph
facilities; they were repaired and restored to operation under orders of the
Secretary of War. Telegraph lines. 2/26/62. (?) Order of Secretary of War
dated 2/25/62 appointing Anson Stager officer in charge. Richardson, Messages
and Papers of the Presidents, Lincoln, Order of Feb. 25, 1862. "by virtue of
the act of Congress" (presumably Railroad and Telegraph Act of 1862, 12 Stat.
334.) To insure effective transmission and security of military
communications. Lines operated under military supervision; censorship of
messages; lines extended and completed subject to limitations of Joint
Resolution of July 14, 1862, 12 Stat. 625. Railroads. 5/25/62 8/8/65. Order of
Secretary of War dated 5/25/62. Richardson, Messages and Papers of the
Presidents, Lincoln, Order of May 25, 1862. "by virtue of the authority vested
by act of Congress" (presumably Railroad and Telegraph Act of 1862, 12 Stat.
334). To insure effective priority to movement of troops and supplies.
Railways operated under military supervision: lines extended and completed
subject to limitations of Joint Resolution of July 14, 1862, 12 Stat. 625;
interruption of regular passenger and freight traffic. World War I Period.2
Bigelow-Hartford Carpet Co., Lowell, Mass. 12/27/17 12/31/19 Order of
Secretary of War, Req. 20 A/C, Ord. No. 62, dated 12/27/17. Constitution and
laws.3 Requisitioned for use of United States Cartridge Co. for cartridge
manufacture. Railroads. 12/28/17 3/1/20 Presidential proclamation, 40 Stat.
1733. Joint Resolution of April 6, 1971.

162

Joint Resolution of Dec. 7, 1917.

163

Act of Aug. 29, 1916.

164

"all other powers thereto me enabling." Labor difficulties; congestion;
ineffective operation in terms of war effort. Wage increase; changes in
operating practices and procedures. Liberty Ordnance Co., Bridgeport, Conn.
1/7/18 5/20/19 Order of Secretary of War, Req. 26 A/C, Ord. No. 27, dated
1/5/18. Constitution and laws.3 Inadequate financing and other difficulties
leading to failure to perform contract for manufacture of 75 mm. guns. Turned
over to American Can Co. for operation. Hoboken Land & Improvement Co.,
Hoboken, N.J. 2/28/19 4/1/19 Order of Secretary of War, Req. 37 A/C, Ord. No.
516, dated 2/28/18. Constitution and laws.3 Requisitioned for use of Remington
Arms - U.M.C. Co. for cartridge manufacture. Bijur Motor Appliance Co.,
Hoboken N.J. 4/1/18

165

8/15/18 5/1/19 Order of Secretary of War, Req. 37 A/C, Ord. No. 516, dated
2/28/18. Constitution and laws.3 Requisitioned for use of Remington Arms -
U.M.C. Co. for cartridge manufacture. Jewel Tea Co., Hoboken, N.J. 4/1/18
9/2/19 Order of Secretary of War, Req. 37 A/C, Ord. No. 516, dated 2/28/18.
Constitution and laws.3 Requisitioned for use of Remington Arms - U.M.C. Co.
for cartridge manufacture.

1

Clyde B. Aitchison states that on March 31, 1861, the Federal authorities took
"under military control the Philadelphia, Wilmington & Baltimore Railway to
insure uninterrupted communication between the North Atlantic States and
Washington." Aitchison, War Time Control of American Railways, 26 Va. L. Rev.
847, 856 (1940). He adds that the return of the road to its private owners
followed "shortly thereafter." _Ibid._ Original documents on this seizure are
unavailable and it has, therefore, not been included in the table.

2

The material in this table is taken from original documents in the National
Archives and Hearings before the Senate Special Committee Investigating the
Munitions Industry, 73d Cong., Part 17, 4270-4271 (1934).

3

Although no specific statutory authority was cited in the seizing order, it is
clear from correspondence and reports in connection with the administration of
the program that the seizure was effected under wartime legislation. See,
_e.g.,_ Davisson, History of the Advisory Section, Administrative Division,
Ordnance Office in connection with the Commandeering of Private Property,
National Archives, Records of the War Department, Office of the chief of
Ordnance, O. O. 023/1362, Nov. 1920; Letter from Ordnance Office,
Administrative Division to The Adjutant General, National Archives, Records of
the War Department, Office of the Adjutant General, AG 386.2, Jan 7, 1919.

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

166

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

167

APPENDIX II. - Continued.

168

PLANT OR FACILITY SEIZED DURATION OF SEIZURE ORDER EFFECTING SEIZURE AUTHORITY
CITED REASON FOR SEIZURE OPERATIONS DURING SEIZURE From To Telegraph lines.
7/25/18 7/31/19 Presidential proclamation, 40 Stat. 1807. Joint Resolution of
July 16, 1918.

169

"all other powers thereto me enabling." Labor difficulties. Anti-union
discrimination terminated. Smith & Wesson, Springfield, Mass. 9/13/18 1/31/19
Order of Secretary of War, Req. 709 B/C, Ord. No. 604, dated 8/31/18.
Constitution and laws.3 Labor difficulties. Anti-union discrimination
terminated; operation by the National Operating Co., a Government corporation.
Federal Enameling & Stamping Co., McKees Rocks, Pa. 9/23/18 12/31/18 Order of
Secretary of War, Req. 738 B/C, Ord. No. 609, dated 9/11/18. Constitution and
laws.3 Failure to fill compulsory order. Mosler Safe Co., Hamilton, Ohio.
9/23/18 2/25/19 Order of Secretary of War, Req. 781 B/C, Ord. No. 612, dated
9/23/18. Constitution and laws.3 Failure to fill compulsory order. Bush
Terminal Co., Brooklyn, N.Y. (?) (?) (?) Act of Aug. 29, 1916.

Food and Fuel Act of 1917. (?) (?)

170

World War II Period4 \-- Seizures Connected With Labor Disputes.

_1\. Before Pearl Harbor._

171

PLANT OR FACILITY SEIZED DURATION OF SEIZURE EXECUTIVE ORDER STATUTORY
AUTHORITY CITED5 DURATION OF STOPPAGE CHANGES IN CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
DURING SEIZURE7 BASIS FOR CHANGES REPORTED LEGAL ACTION8 From To From To6
North American Aviation, Inc., Inglewood, Ca. 6/9/41 7/2/41 8773.

172

6 Fed. Reg. 2777. None. (Order cites contracts of company with Government and
ownership by Government of machinery, materials and work in progress in
plant.) 6/5/41 6/10/41 Property returned on agreement of parties to wage
increase and maintenance of membership. Agreement of parties on National
Defense Mediation Board recommendation. Federal Shipbuilding & Drydock Co.,
Kearny, N.J. 8/23/41 1/6/42 8868.

173

6 Fed. Reg. 4349. None. (Order cites contracts of company with Government and
ownership by Government of vessels under construction, materials and equipment
in yard.) 8/6/41 8/23/41 Maintenance of membership during period of seizure.
National Defense Mediation Board recommendation. Air Associates, Inc., Bendix,
N.J. 10/30/41 12/29/41 8928.

174

6 Fed. Reg. 5559. None. (Order cites contracts of company with Government and
ownership by Government of facilities in plant.) 7/11/41

9/30/41 7/27/41

175

10/24/41 Strikers reinstated over replacements hired by company prior to
seizure. Agreement of parties on National Defense Mediation Board
recommendation.

176

Footnotes for this page are on the continued page

3

See n. 3, p. 620, _supra_.

4

The material in this table is summarized from a number of sources, chief of
which are the War Labor Reports, contemporary accounts in the New York Times,
United States National Wage Stabilization Board, Research and statistics
report No. 2 (1946), and Johnson, Government Seizures and Labor Disputes
(Philadelphia, Pa., 1948) (unpublished doctoral dissertation at the University
of Pennsylvania). Question marks appear in the tables in instances where no
satisfactory information on the particular point was available.

5

Each of the Executive Orders uses the stock phrase "the constitution and laws"
as authority for the President's action as well as his position as Commander
in Chief. Only specific statutory authority relied upon is given in this
table. The form of reference of the particular Executive Order is used.
Statutes referred to in the table are analyzed in Appendix I, _supra,_ p. 615.
For convenience, their citations are repeated here:

177

(1) Army Appropriations Act of Aug. 29, 1916, 39 Stat. 619, 645, 10 U.S.C. ยง
1361.

178

(2) Federal Water Power Act of 1920, ยง 16, 41 Stat. 1063, 1072, 16 U.S.C. ยง
809.

179

(3) Selective Training and Service Act of 1940, ยง 9, 54 Stat. 885, 892.

180

(4) War Labor Disputes Act., ยง 3, 57 Stat. 163, 164.

181

(5) Revenue Act of 1943, Tit. VIII, "Repricing of War Contracts," 58 Stat. 21,
92.

182

When seizures of transportation facilities were effected through agencies
other than the War Department, the First War Powers Act of 1941, 55 Stat. 838,
was cited. Title I of that Act permitted the President to shift certain
functions among executive agencies in aid of the war effort. The Act of Aug.
29, 1916, authorizing seizure of transportation facilities, specified that it
should be accomplished through the Secretary of War.

6

Stoppages continuing during seizure are indicated by an asterisk (*).

7

Unless otherwise indicated, changes in conditions of employment instituted
during seizure were continued by management upon the return of the facilities
to its control.

8

Validity of seizure was challenged in comparatively few cases. Most litigation
concerned the consequences of seizure. Cases in which the validity of the
seizure was attacked are indicated by a dagger ( ).

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

183

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

184

APPENDIX II - Continued.

185

_2\. Between Pearl Harbor and the Passage of the War Labor Disputes Act, June,
25, 1943._

186

PLANT OR FACILITY SEIZED DURATION OF SEIZURE EXECUTIVE ORDER STATUTORY
AUTHORITY CITED5 DURATION OF STOPPAGE CHANGES IN CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
DURING SEIZURE7 BASIS FOR CHANGES REPORTED LEGAL ACTION8 From To From To6
Toledo, P. & W. R. Co. 3/21/42 10/1/45 9108.

187

7 Fed. Reg. 2201. None. 12/28/41 3/21/42 Wage increase during period of
seizure. War Labor Board recommendation. _Toledo P. & W. R. Co. v. Stover,_ 60
F. Supp. 587 (S. D. Ill. 1945. General Cable Co., Bayonne, N.J., plant.
8/13/42 8/20/42 9220.

188

7 Fed. Reg. 6413. None. 8/10/42 8/13/42 None. War Labor Board recommendation.
S. A. Woods Machine Co., South Boston, Mass. 8/19/42 8/25/42 9225

189

7 Fed. Reg. 6627. None. None. None. Maintenance of membership. War Labor Board
recommendation. Coal Mines. 5/2/43 10/12/43 9340.

8 Fed. Reg. 5695. None. 4/22/43

6/1/43

6/20/43 5/2/43

190

6/7/43*

191

(?)* Six-day week; eight-hour day.

192

(To increase take-home pay.) Order of the Secretary of Interior. _United
States v. Pewee Coal Co.,_ 341 U.S. 114; _NLRB v. West Ky. Coal Co.,_ 152 F.
2d 198 (6th Cir. 1945); _Glen Alden Coal Co. v. NLRB,_ 141 F. 2d 47 (3d Cir.
1944.). American R. Co. of Porto Rico. 5/13/43 7/1/44 9341.

193

8 Fed. Reg. 6323. None. 5/12/43 5/13/43 Wage increase. War Labor Board
recommendation.

194

_3\. Between June 25, 1943, and VJ Day._

195

Atlantic Basin Iron Works, Brooklyn, N.Y. 9/3/43 9/22/43 9375.

196

8 Fed. Reg. 12253. War Labor Disputes Act. None. None. Maintenance of
membership. War Labor Board recommendation. Coal Mines. 11/1/43 6/21/44 9393.

197

8 Fed. Reg. 14877. War Labor Disputes Act. 10/12/43

198

11/1/43 11/4/43* Changes in wages and hours. Agreement with Secretary of
Interior. Leather Manufacturers in Salem, Peabody, and Danvers, Mass. 11/20/43
12/13/43 9395B.

8 Fed. Reg 16957. None. 9/25/43

199

(sporadic) 11/24/43* None. (Jurisdictional strike.) None. Western Electric
Co., Point Breeze plant, Baltimore, Md. 12/19/43 3/23/44 9408.

200

8 Fed. Reg. 16958. War Labor Disputes Act. 12/14/43 12/19/43 None. (Strike in
protest of War Labor Board nonsegregation ruling.) None. Railroads. 12/30/43
1/18/44 9412.

201

8 Fed. Reg. 17395. Act of Aug. 29, 1916. None. None. Control relinquished when
parties accepted Presidential compromise of wage demands. Presidential
arbitration based on Railway Labor Act Emergency Board recommendations.
_Thorne v. Washington Terminal Co.,_ 55 F. Supp. 139 (D.D.C. 1944.) Fall
River, Mass., Textile Plants. 2/7/44 2/28/44 9420.

202

9 Fed. Reg. 1563. War Labor Disputes Act. 12/13/43 2/14/44* Property returned
upon agreement by parties on seniority provisions. War Labor Board
recommendation.

5

See n. 5, p. 621, _supra._6 See n. 6, p. 621, _supra._7 See n. 7, p. 621,
_supra._8 See n. 8, p. 621, _supra._

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

203

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

204

APPENDIX II - Continued.

205

PLANT OR FACILITY SEIZED DURATION OF SEIZURE EXECUTIVE ORDER STATUTORY
AUTHORITY CITED5 DURATION OF STOPPAGE CHANGES IN CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
DURING SEIZURE7 BASIS FOR CHANGES REPORTED LEGAL ACTION8 From To From To6
Department of Water and Power, Los Angeles, Calif. 2/23/44 2/29/44 9426.

206

9 Fed. Reg. 2113. War Labor Disputes Act. 2/14/44 2/24/44 None. None. Jenkins
Bros., Inc., Bridgeport, Conn. 4/13/44 6/15/44 9435.

207

9 Fed. Reg. 4063. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended. None. None.
Wage increase. War Labor Board recommendation. _In re Jenkins Bros., Inc._ 15
W. L. R. 719 (D.D.C. 1944.) Ken-Rad Tube & Lamp Co., Owensboro, Ky. 4/13/44
6/15/44 9436.

208

9 Fed. Reg. 4063. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended. None. None.
Changes in wage scales; maintenance of membership. War Labor Board
recommendation. _Ken-Rad Tube & Lamp Corp. v. Badeau,_ 55 F. Supp. 193 (W.D.
Ky. 1944). Montgomery Ward & Co., Chicago, Ill., facilities 4/25/44 5/9/44
9438.

209

9 Fed. Reg. 4459. None. None. None. None. (Government extended expired
contract pending NLRB election to determine bargaining representative.) War
Labor Board recommendation. _United States v. Montgomery Ward & Co.,_ 150 F.
2d 369 (7th Cir. 1945.) Montgomery Ward & Co., Hummer Mfg. division,
Springfield, Ill. 5/21/44 7/2/45 9443.

210

9 Fed. Reg. 5395. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended. 5/5/44
5/21/44 Maintenance of membership; voluntary check-off. War Labor Board
recommendation. Philadelphia Transportation Co., Philadelphia, Pa. 8/3/44
8/17/44 9459.

211

9 Fed. Reg. 9878. Act of Aug. 29, 1916.

212

First War Powers Act of 1941.

213

ยง 9 of Selective Service Act of 1940, as amended. 8/1/44 8/7/44* None. (Strike
in protest of WLB nonsegregation ruling.) None. _United States v. McMenamin,_
58 F. Supp. 478 (E. D. Pa. 1944). Midwest Trucking Operators. 8/11/44 1/1/45

214

11/1/45 9426.

215

9 Fed. Reg. 10071. Act of Aug. 29, 1916.

216

First War Powers Act of 1941.

217

ยง 9 of Selective Service Act of 1940, as amended. 8/4/44 8/11/44 Wage
increase. War Labor Board recommendation. San Francisco, Calif., Machine
Shops. 8/14/44

218

8/19/44 9/14/45 9463.

219

9 Fed. Reg. 9879.

9466.

220

9 Fed. Reg. 10139. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940, as amended. Sporadic.
Sporadic. Union agreed not to discipline employees who worked over-time.
Cancellation of employee draft deferments, gas rations, and job referral
rights. War Labor Board recommendation. _San Francisco Lodge No. 68 IAM v.
Forrestal,_ 58 F. Supp. 466 (N.D. Calif. 1944.) Anthracite Coal Mines. 8/23/44

9/19/44 2/24/45 9469.9

221

9 Fed. Reg. 10343. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 6/29/44

8/?/44 8/23/44

222

9/?/4410 None. None. International Nickel Co., Huntington, W. Va., plant.
8/29/44 10/14/44 9473.

223

9 Fed. Reg. 10613. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended. 8/1844
8/29/44 None. None.

5

See n. 5, p. 621, _supra._ _6_ See n. 6, p. 621, _supra._ _7_ See n. 7, p.
621, _supra._ _8_ See n. 8, p. 621, _supra._

224

_9_ This order was followed by a series drawn in the same terms extending the
seizure to additional mines. The Executive Orders were: No. 9474, 9 Fed. Reg.
10815; No. 9476, 9 Fed. Reg. 10817; No. 9478, 9 Fed. Reg. 11045; No. 9481, 9
Fed. Reg. 11387; No. 9482, 9 Fed. Reg. 11459; No. 9483, 9 Fed. Reg. 11601.

225

_10_ A series of strikes for recognition by supervisory employees at the
various mines were usually, though not always, terminated on seizure of the
affected property.

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

226

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

227

APPENDIX II - Continued.

228

PLANT OR FACILITY SEIZED DURATION OF SEIZURE EXECUTIVE ORDER STATUTORY
AUTHORITY CITED5 DURATION OF STOPPAGE CHANGES IN CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
DURING SEIZURE7 BASIS FOR CHANGES REPORTED LEGAL ACTION8 From To From To6
Hughes Tool Co., Houston Tex., facilities 9/2/44 8/29/45 9475A.

229

9 Fed. Reg. 10943. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended. None. None.
Maintenance of membership during period of seizure. War Labor Board
recommendation. Cleveland Graphite Bronze Co., Cleveland, Ohio. 9/5/44 11/8/44
9477.

230

9 Fed. Reg. 10941. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 8/31/44 9/5/44 Union agreed to arbitrate grievances which
had precipitated the strike. War Labor Board recommendation. Twentieth Century
Brass Works, Inc., Minneapolis, Minn. 9/9/44 2/17/45 9480.

231

9 Fed. Reg. 11143. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended. 8/21/44
9/9/44 Wage increase. War Labor Board recommendation. Farrell Cheek Steel Co.,
Sandusky, Ohio 9/23/44 8/28/45 9484.

232

9 Fed. Reg. 11731. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 9/11/44 9/23/44 Wage increase; maintenance of membership
during period of seizure. War Labor Board recommendation. Toledo, Ohio,
Machine Shops. 11/4/44 11/6/44 9496.

233

9 Fed. Reg. 13187. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 10/27/44 11/5/44 None. (Jurisdictional strike.) None.
Cudahy Bros. Co., Cudahy, Wis. 12/6/44 8/31/45 9505.

234

9 Fed. Reg. 14473. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. None. None. Maintenance of membership; voluntary check-
off. War Labor Board recommendation. Montgomery Ward & Co., Detroit, Mich.,
and other facilities 12/27/44 10/18/45 9508

235

9 Fed. Reg. 15079. War Labor Disputes Act.

236

ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended. 12/9/44 12/27/44 Maintenance of
membership and voluntary check-off during period of seizure. War Labor Board
recommendation. _National War Labor Board v. Montgomery Ward & Co.,_ 144 F. 2d
528 (D. C. Cir. 1944.) Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., Cleveland, Ohio.
1/3/45 1/15/45 9511.

237

10 Fed. Reg. 549. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended. 1/12/45
1/13/45 None. None. Bingham & Garfield R. R., Utah. 1/24/45 8/29/45 9516.

238

10 Fed. Reg. 1313. Act of Aug. 29, 1916.

239

First War Powers Act of 1941.

240

War Labor Disputes Act. 1/23/45 1/24/45 Property returned upon agreement by
parties on wage scale for certain positions. Railway Labor Act Emergency Board
recommendation. American Enka Corp., Enka, N. C. 2/18/45 6/6/45 9523.

241

10 Fed. Reg. 2133. War Labor Disputes Act.

242

Selective Service Act as amended. 2/7/45 2/18/45 None. (Strike over question
of contract interpretation submitted to arbitration.) War Labor Board
recommendation. Coal Mines:

243

Bituminous.

244

Anthracite.

4/10/45

5/3/45

5/12/45

10/25/45

6/23/45

9536.

245

10 Fed. Reg. 3939.

9548.

246

10 Fed. Reg. 5025.

247

ยง 9, Selective Service Act as amended by the War Labor Disputes Act.

4/1/45

5/1/45

4/11/45

248

5/24/45*

249

Wage increase.

250

Wage increase.

251

Agreement of parties.

252

Agreement of parties. Cities Service Refining Corp., Lake Charles, La., plant.
4/17/45 12/23/45 9540.

253

10 Fed. Reg. 4193. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. (?) 4/17/45 None. (Strike over housing conditions.) None.5
See n. 5, p. 621, _supra._ 6 See n. 6, p. 621, _supra._ 7 See n. 7, p. 621,
_supra._ 8 See n. 8, p. 621, _supra._ YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

254

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

255

APPENDIX II - Continued.

256

PLANT OR FACILITY SEIZED DURATION OF SEIZURE EXECUTIVE ORDER STATUTORY
AUTHORITY CITED5 DURATION OF STOPPAGE CHANGES IN CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
DURING SEIZURE7 BASIS FOR CHANGES REPORTED LEGAL ACTION8 From To From To6
United Engineering Co., Ltd., San Francisco, Calif. 4/25/45 8/31/45 9542.

257

10 Fed. Reg. 4591. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 4/12/45 (?) Union's privileges under contract revoked. War
Labor Board recommendation. Cocker Machine & Foundry Co., Gastonia, N. C.
5/20/45 8/31/45 9552.

258

10 Fed. Reg. 5757. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended as amended by
the War Labor Disputes Act. (?) 5/20/45 Wage increase; maintenance of
membership during period of seizure. War Labor Board recommendation. Chicago,
Ill, Motor Carriers. 5/23/45 8/16/45 9554.

259

10 Fed. Reg. 5981. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act.

260

Act of Aug. 29, 1916.

First War Powers Act of 1941. 5/19/45

6/16/45 5/24/45

261

6/27/45* Wage increase. War Labor Board recommendation. Gaffney Mfg. Co.,
Gaffney, S. C. 5/28/45 9/9/45 9559.

262

10 Fed. Reg. 6287. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. (?) 5/28/45 Wage increase and maintenance of membership
during period of seizure. War Labor Board recommendation. Mary-Leila Cotton
Mills, Greensboro, Ga. 6/1/45 8/31/45 9560.

263

10 Fed. Reg. 6547. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 4/1/45 6/1/45 Contract extension; maintenance of
membership and voluntary check-off during period of seizure. War Labor Board
recommendation. Humble Oil & Refining Co., Ingleside, Tex., plant. 6/5/45
9/10/45 9564.

264

10 Fed. Reg. 6791. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. None. None. Maintenance of membership during period of
seizure. War Labor Board recommendation. _Eighth Regional War Labor Bd. v.
Humble Oil & Refining Co.,_ 145 F. 2d 462 (5th Cir. 1945.) Pure Oil Co., Cabin
Creek oilfield, Dawes, W. Va., facilities. 6/6/45 9/10/45 9565.

265

10 Fed. Reg. 6792. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 5/14/45 6/6/45 Maintenance of membership during period of
seizure. War Labor Board recommendation. Scranton Transit Co., Scranton, Pa.
6/14/45 7/8/45 9570.

266

10 Fed. Reg. 7235. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act.

267

Act of Aug. 20, 1916.

268

First War Powers Act of 1941. 5/20/45 6/14/45 None. None. Diamond Alkali Co.,
Painesville, Ohio. 6/19/45 7/19/45 9574.

269

10 Fed. Reg. 7435. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 6/15/45 6/19/45 Property returned upon agreement by
parties to wage increase. None. Texas Co., Port Arthur, Tex., plant. 7/1/45
9/10/45 9577A.

270

10 Fed. Reg. 8090. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 6/29/45 7/1/45 None. (Strike over racial discrimination.)
None.

5

See n. 5, p. 621, _supra._ _6_ See n. 6, p. 621, _supra._ _7_ See n. 7, p.
621, _supra._ _8_ See n. 8, p. 621, _supra._

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

271

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

272

APPENDIX II - Continued.

273

PLANT OR FACILITY SEIZED DURATION OF SEIZURE EXECUTIVE ORDER STATUTORY
AUTHORITY CITED5 DURATION OF STOPPAGE CHANGES IN CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
DURING SEIZURE7 BASIS FOR CHANGES REPORTED LEGAL ACTION8 From To From To6
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co., Akron, Ohio. 7/4/45 8/30/45 9585.

274

10 Fed. Reg. 8335. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 6/20/45 7/4/45 Agreement by union to submit future
disputes to federal agency. (?). Sinclair Rubber Co., Houston, Tex., butadiene
plant 7/19/45 11/19/45 9589A.

275

10 Fed. Reg. 8949. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. None. None. Change in union security arrangements. War
Labor Board recommendation. Springfield Plywood Co., Springfield, Oreg.
7/25/45 8/30/45 9593.

276

10 Fed. Reg. 9379. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. (?) 7/25/45 None. None. U.S. Rubber Co., Detroit, Mich.,
facilities 7/31/45 10/10/45 9595.

277

10 Fed. Reg. 9571. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 7/14/45 7/31/45 None. None. _4\. Between VJ Day and the
Expiration of the War Labor Disputes Act Seizure Powers, Dec. 31, 1946._
Illinois Central R. Co. 8/23/45 5/27/46 9602.

278

10 Fed. Reg. 10957. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by ยง of the
War Labor Disputes Act.

279

Act of Aug. 29, 1916.

280

First War Powers Act of 1941. None. None. None. (Jurisdictional strike)
Railway Labor Act Emergency Board recommended against change. Petroleum
Refineries and Pipelines. (One-half national refining capacity.) 10/4/45
12/12/45

281

2/?/46 9639.

282

10 Fed. Reg. 12592. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 9/16/45 10/5/45 Plants returned on agreement of owners to
18 percent wage increase. _Ad hoc_ fact-finding board recommendation. Capital
Transit Co., Washington, D.C. 11/21/45 1/7/46 9658.

283

10 Fed. Reg. 14351. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by ยง 3 of
the War Labor Disputes Act.

284

Act of Aug. 29, 1916.

First War Powers Act of 1941. 11/6/45

11/20/45 11/7/45

285

11/21/45 Facilities returned when parties agreed to arbitration award on
wages. _Ad hoc_ arbitration board award. Great Lakes Towing Co., Cleveland,
Ohio. 11/29/45 12/18/46 9661.

286

10 Fed. Reg. 14591. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by ยง3 of the
War Labor Disputes Act.

287

Act of Aug. 29, 1916.

First War Powers Act of 1941. 9/4/45

288

11/1/45 11/29/45 Wage increase. National Wage Stabilization Board
recommendation. Meatpacking Industry. 1/24/46 3/12/46

289

5/22/46 9685.

290

11 Fed. Reg. 989.

9690.

291

11 Fed. Reg. 1337. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 1/16/46 1/28/46* Plants returned as companies agreed to
wage increase recommended by fact-finding board. _Ad hoc_ fact-finding board
recommendation approved by National Wage Stabilization Board.

5

See n. 5, p. 621, _supra._ _6_ See n. 6, p. 621, _supra._ _7_ See n. 7, p.
621, _supra._ _8_ See n. 8, p. 621, _supra._

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

292

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

293

APPENDIX II - Continued.

294

PLANT OR FACILITY SEIZED DURATION OF SEIZURE EXECUTIVE ORDER STATUTORY
AUTHORITY CITED5 DURATION OF STOPPAGE CHANGES IN CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
DURING SEIZURE7 BASIS FOR CHANGES REPORTED LEGAL ACTION8 From To From To6 New
York Harbor Tugboat Companies. 2/5/46 3/3/46 9693.

295

11 Fed. Reg. 1421. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by ยง 3 of the
War Labor Disputes Act.

296

Act of Aug. 29, 1916.

297

First War Powers Act of 1941. 2/4/46 2/13/46* Properties returned after
agreement of parties to arbitrate dispute. None. Railroads. 5/17/46 5/26/46
9727.

298

11 Fed. Reg. 5461. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by ยง 3 of the
War Labor Disputes Act.

299

Act of Aug. 29, 1916.

300

First War Powers Act of 1941. 5/23/46 5/25/46* Properties returned after
unions agreed to Presidential compromise of wage demands. Railway Labor Act
Emergency board recommendation as modified by President. Bituminous Coal
Mines. 5/21/46 6/30/47 9728.

301

11 Fed. Reg. 5593. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by the War
Labor Disputes Act. 4/1/46

5/25/46 5/11/46

302

5/30/46* Wage increase, welfare and retirement fund, mine safety provisions,
and recognition of UMW as representative of supervisory employees during
period of seizure. Contract between union and Secretary of Interior. _Union
States v. United Mine Workers,_ 330 U. S. 258; _Jones & Laughlin Steel Co. v.
UMW,_ 159 F. 2d 18 (D.C. Circ. 1946); _Krug v. Fox,_ 161 F. 2d 1013 (4th circ.
1947.) Monongahela Connecting R. Co., Pittsburgh, Pa. 6/14/46 8/12/46 9736.

303

11 Fed. Reg. 6661. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended by ยง 3 of the
War Labor Disputes Act.

304

Act of Aug. 29, 1916.

305

First War Powers Act of 1941. 6/10/46 6/14/46 None. _5\. Since the expiration
of the War Labor Disputes Act Seizures Powers, Dec. 31, 1946._ Railroads.
5/10/48 7/9/48 9957.

306

13 Fed. Reg. 2503. Act of Aug. 29, 1916. None. None. Property returned on
agreement of parties to wage increase. Railway Labor Act Emergency Board
recommendation as modified. _United States v. Brotherhood of Locomotive
Engineers,_ 79 F. Supp. 485 (D.D.C. 1948). Chicago, Rock Island & Pacific R.
Co. 7/8/50 5/23/52 10141.

307

15 Fed. Reg. 4363. Act of Aug. 29, 1916. 6/25/50 7/8/50 Property returned on
agreement of parties to wage increase. Railway Labor Act Emergency Board
recommendation as modified. Railroads. 8/27/50 5/23/52 10155.

308

15 Fed. Reg. 5785. Act of Aug. 29, 1916. 12/10/50

1/29/51

3/9/52 12/15/50

2/19/51

309

3/12/52 Agreement reached by carriers and some of the Brotherhoods put into
effect. Property returned on agreement of parties to wage increase. Railway
Labor Act Emergency Board recommendation as modified.

5

See n. 5, p. 621, _supra._ _6_ See n. 6, p. 621, _supra._ _7_ See n. 7, p.
621, _supra._ _8_ See n. 8, p. 621, _supra._

YOUNGSTOWN CO. v. SAWYER

310

FRANKFURTER, J., concurring.

311

APPENDIX II - Continued.

312

World War II Period4 \-- Seizures Unconnected with Labor Disputes.

313

PLANT OR FACILITY SEIZED DURATION OF SEIZURE EXECUTIVE ORDER STATUTORY
AUTHORITY CITED5 REASONS FOR SEIZURE CHANGES INSTITUTED DURING SEIZURE From To
Grand River Dam Authority, Oklahoma. 11/19/41 7/31/46 8944.

314

6 Fed. Reg. 5947. ยง 16, Federal Power Act. This was a State power project,
financed by federal loan and grant. Seizure was based on (1) State default on
loan interest; (2) refusal of State legislature to issue bonds to complete
financing; (3) failure to meet scheduled completion date in power-short
defense area. Federal Works Administrator replaced management and completed
the project. Transferred to Department of Interior, Executive Order No. 9373,
8 Fed. Reg. 12001, 8/30/43. Returned pursuant to Act of July 31, 1946, 60
Stat. 743. Brewster Aeronautical Corp., Long Island City, N.Y., Newark, N.J.,
Johnsville, Pa. 4/18/42 5/20/42 9141.

315

7 Fed. Reg. 2961. None. (1) Inefficient management; (2) failure to operate at
full capacity; (3) failure to maintain delivery schedules on Army and Navy
aircraft. (Congressional investigation suggested labor difficulties as well,
due to employment of enemy aliens.) New board of directors and officers
installed; majority shareholders established 2 1/2 year voting trust in favor
of new president. Triumph Explosives, Inc., Maryland and Delaware plants.
10/12/42 2/28/43

316

6/5/43 9254.

317

7 Fed. Reg. 8333. None. Overpayments (presumably bribes) of $1,400,000 to
procurement officers. New board of directors and officers; indictments against
former officials. Howarth Pivoted Bearings Co., Philadelphia, Pa. 6/14/43
8/25/45 9351.

318

8 Fed. Reg. 8097. None. Inefficient management. Designees of Secretary of Navy
operated plant for duration of war. Remington Rand, Inc., Southport, N.Y.,
plant. 11/23/43 9/30/44 9399.

319

8 Fed. Reg. 16269. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended. (1) Norden
bombsight parts production of unacceptable quality; (2) deliveries behind
schedule. Designees of Secretary of Navy supervised operations for duration of
seizure. Los Angeles Shipbuilding & Drydock Corp., Los Angeles, Calif. 12/8/43
8/25/45 9400.

320

8 Fed. Reg. 16641. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended. (1)
Excessive costs; (2) production behind schedule. Operated by contractor (Todd
Shipyard Co.) for duration of war. York Safe & Lock Co., York, Pa. 1/23/44
3/15/45 9416.

321

9 Fed. Reg. 936. ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended. (1)
Inefficient management; (2) deliveries behind schedule. Designees of Secretary
of Navy operated company for duration of war, except for a portion which was
condemned and transferred to Blaw-Knox Co. Lord Mfg. Co., Erie, Pa.11 10/24/44
8/25/45 9493.

322

9 Fed. Reg. 12860. Tit. VIII, Revenue Act of 1943.

323

ยง 9, Selective Service Act of 1940 as amended. Refusal to deliver items at
"fair and reasonable prices" fixed by the Secretary of the Navy in contract
renegotiation. Designees of Secretary of Navy operated company for duration of
war.

4

See n. 4, p. 621, _supra._5 See n. 5, p. 621, _supra._11 See _Lord Mfg. Co. v.
Collins,_ 62 F. Supp. 79 (W. D. Pa. 1945).

324

Mr. Justice DOUGLAS, concurring.

325

There can be no doubt that the emergency which caused the President to seize
these steel plants was one that bore heavily on the country. But the emergency
did not create power; it merely marked an occasion when power should be
exercised. And the fact that it was necessary that measures be taken to keep
steel in production does not mean that the President, rather than the
Congress, had the constitutional authority to act. The Congress, as well as
the President, is trustee of the national welfare. The President can act more
quickly than the Congress. The President with the armed services at his
disposal can move with force as well as with speed. All executive power--from
the reign of ancient kings to the rule of modern dictators--has the outward
appearance of efficiency.

326

Legislative power, by contrast, is slower to exercise. There must be delay
while the ponderous machinery of committees, hearings, and debates is put into
motion. That takes time; and while the Congress slowly moves into action, the
emergency may take its toll in wages, consumer goods, war production, the
standard of living of the people, and perhaps even lives. Legislative action
may indeed often be cumbersome, time-consuming, and apparently inefficient.
But as Mr. Justice Brandeis stated in his dissent in Myers v. United States,
272 U.S. 52, 293, 47 S.Ct. 21, 85, 71 L.Ed. 160:

327

'The doctrine of the separation of powers was adopted by the Convention of
1787 not to promote efficiency but to preclude the exercise of arbitrary
power. The purpose was not to avoid friction, but, by means of the inevitable
friction incident to the distribution of the governmental powers among three
departments, to save the people from autocracy.' We therefore cannot decide
this case by determining which branch of government can deal most
expeditiously with the present crisis. The answer must depend on the
allocation of powers under the Constitution. That in turn requires an analysis
of the conditions giving rise to the seizure and of the seizure itself.

328

The relations between labor and industry are one of the crucial problems of
the era. Their solution will doubtless entail many methods--education of labor
leaders and business executives; the encouragement of mediation and
conciliation by the President and the use of his great office in the cause of
industrial peace; and the passage of laws. Laws entail sanctions--penalties
for their violation. One type of sanction is find and imprisonment. Another is
seizure of property. An industry may become so lawless, so irresponsible as to
endanger the whole economy. Seizure of the industry may be the only wise and
practical solution.

329

The method by which industrial peace is achieved is of vital importance not
only to the parties but to society as well. A determination that sanctions
should be applied, that the hand of the law should be placed upon the parties,
and that the force of the courts should be directed against them, is an
exercise of legislative power. In some nations that power is entrusted to the
executive branch as a matter of course or in case of emergencies. We chose
another course. We chose to place the legislative power of the Federal
Government in the Congress. The language of the Constitution is not ambiguous
or qualified. It places not some legislative power in the Congress; Article I,
Section 1 says 'All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a
Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of
Representatives.'

330

The legislative nature of the action taken by the President seems to me to be
clear. When the United States takes over an industrial plant to settle a labor
controversy, it is condemning property. The seizure of the plant is a taking
in the constitutional sense. United States v. Pewee Coal Co., 341 U.S. 114, 71
S.Ct. 670, 95 L.Ed. 809. A permanent taking would amount to the
nationalization of the industry. A temporary taking falls short of that goal.
But though the seizure is only for a week or a month, the condemnation is
complete and the United States must pay compensation for the temporary
possession. United States v. General Motors Corp., 323 U.S. 373, 65 S.Ct. 357,
89 L.Ed. 311; United States v. Pewee Coal Co., supra.

331

The power of the Federal Government to condemn property is well established.
Kohl v. United States, 91 U.S. 367, 23 L.Ed. 449. It can condemn for any
public purpose; and I have no doubt but that condemnation of a plant, factory,
or industry in order to promote industrial peace would be constitutional. But
there is a duty to pay for all property taken by the Government. The command
of the Fifth Amendment is that no 'private property be taken for public use,
without just compensation. That constitutional requirement has an important
bearing on the present case.

332

The President has no power to raise reveunes. That power is in the Congress by
Article I, Section 8 of the Constitution. The President might seize and the
Congress by subsequent action might ratify the seizure.1 But until and unless
Congress acted, no condemnation would be lawful. The branch of government that
has the power to pay compensation for a seizure is the only one able to
authorize a seizure or make lawful one that the President had effected.2 That
seems to me to be the necessary result of the condemnation provision in the
Fifth Amendment. It squares with the theory of checks and balances expounded
by Mr. Justice BLACK in the opinion of the Court in which I Join.

333

If we sanctioned the present exercise of power by the President, we would be
expanding Article II of the Constitution and rewriting it to suit the
political conveniences of the present emergency. Article II which vests the
'executive Power' in the President defines that power with particularity.
Article II, Section 2 makes the Chief Executive the Commander in Chief of the
Army and Navy. But our history and tradition rebel at the thought that the
grant of military power carries with it authority over civilian affairs.
Article II, Section 3 provides that the President shall 'from time to time
give to the Congress Information of the State of the Union, and recommend to
their Consideration such Measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient.'
The power to recommend legislation, granted to the President, serves only to
emphasize that it is his function to recommend and that it is the function of
the Congress to legislate. Article II, Section 3, also provides that the
President 'shall take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed.' But as Mr.
Justice BLACK and Mr. Justice FRANKFURTER point out the power to execute the
laws starts and ends with the laws Congress has enacted.

334

The great office of President is not a weak and powerless one. The President
represents the people and is their spokesman in domestic and foreign affairs.
The office is respected more than any other in the land. It gives a position
of leadership that is unique. The power to formulate policies and mould
opinion inheres in the Presidency and conditions our national life. The impact
of the man and the philosophy he represents may at times be thwarted by the
Congress. Stalemates may occur when emergencies mount and the Nation suffers
for lack of harmonious, reciprocal action between the White House and Capitol
Hill. That is a risk inherent in our system of separation of powers. The
tragedy of such stalemates might be avoided by allowing the President the use
of some legislative authority. The Framers with memories of the tyrannies
produced by a blending of executive and legislative power rejected that
political arrangement. Some future generation may, however, deem it so urgent
that the President have legislative authority that the Constitution will be
amended. We could not sanction the seizures and condemnations of the steel
plants in this case without reading Article II as giving the President not
only the power to execute the laws but to make some. Such a step would most
assuredly alter the pattern of the Constitution.

335

We pay a price for our system of checks and balances, for the distribution of
power among the three branches of government. It is a price that today may
seem exorbitant to many. Today a kindly President uses the seizure power to
effect a wage increase and to keep the steel furnaces in production. Yet
tomorrow another President might use the same power to prevent a wage
increase, to curb trade unionists, to regiment labor as oppressively as
industry thinks it has been regimented by this seizure.

336

Mr. Justice JACKSON, concurring in the judgment and opinion of the cuort.

337

That comprehensive and undefined presidential powers hold both practical
advantages and grave dangers for the country will impress anyone who has
served as legal adviser to a President in time of transition and public
anxiety. While an interval of detached reflection may temper teachings of that
experience, they probably are a more realistic influence on my views than the
conventional materials of judicial decision which seem unduly to accentuate
doctrine and legal fiction. But as we approach the question of presidential
power, we half overcome mental hazards by recognizing them. The opinions of
judges, no less than executives and publicists, often suffer the infirmity of
confusing the issue of a power's validity with the cause it is invoked to
promote, of confounding the permanent executive office with its temporary
occupant. The tendency is strong to emphasize transient results upon policies
--such as wages or stabilization--and lose sight of enduring consequences upon
the balanced power structure of our Republic.

338

A judge, like an executive adviser, may be surprised at the poverty of really
useful and unambiguous authority applicable to concrete problems of executive
power as they actually present themselves. Just what our forefathers did
envision, or would have envisioned had they foreseen modern conditions, must
be divined from materials almost as enigmatic as the dreams Joseph was called
upon to interpret for Pharaoh. A century and a half of partisan debate and
scholarly speculation yields no net result but only supplies more or less apt
quotations from respected sources on each side of any question. They largely
cancel each other.1 And court decisions are indecisive because of the judicial
practice of dealing with the largest questions in the most narrow way.

339

The actual art of governing under our Constitution does not and cannot conform
to judicial definitions of the power of any of its branches based on isolated
clauses or even single Articles torn from context. While the Constitution
diffuses power the better to secure liberty, it also contemplates that
practice will integrate the dispersed powers into a workable government. It
enjoins upon its branches separateness but interdependence, autonomy but
reciprocity. Presidential powers are not fixed but fluctuate, depending upon
their disjunction or conjunction with those of Congress. We may well begin by
a somewhat over-simplified grouping of practical situations in which a
President may doubt, or others may challenge, his powers, and by
distinguishing roughly the legal consequences of this factor of relativity.

340

1\. When the President acts pursuant to an express or implied authorization of
Congress, his authority is at its maximum, for it includes all that he
possesses in his own right plus all that Congress can delegate.2 In these
circumstances, and in these only, may he be said (for what it may be worth),
to personify the federal sovereignty. If his act is held unconstitutional
under these circumstances, it usually means that the Federal Government as an
undivided whole lacks power. A seizure executed by the President pursuant to
an Act of Congress would be supported by the strongest of presumptions and the
widest latitude of judicial interpretation, and the burden of persuasion would
rest heavily upon any who might attack it.

341

2\. When the President acts in absence of either a congressional grant or
denial of authority, he can only rely upon his own independent powers, but
there is a zone of twilight in which he and Congress may have concurrent
authority, or in which its distribution is uncertain. Therefore, congressional
inertia, indifference or quiescence may sometimes, at least as a practical
matter, enable, if not invite, measures on independent presidential
responsibility. In this area, any actual test of power is likely to depend on
the imperatives of events and contemporary imponderables rather than on
abstract theories of law.3

342

3\. When the President takes measures incompatible with the expressed or
implied will of Congress, his power is at its lowest ebb, for then he can rely
only upon his own constitutional powers minus any constitutional powers of
Congress over the matter. Courts can sustain exclusive Presidential control in
such a case only be disabling the Congress from acting upon the subject.4
Presidential claim to a power at once so conclusive and preclusive must be
scrutinized with caution, for what is at stake is the equilibruim established
by our constitutional system.

343

Into which of these classifications does this executive seizure of the steel
industry fit? It is eliminated from the first by admission, for it is conceded
that no congressional authorization exists for this seizure. That takes away
also the support of the many precedents and declarations which were made in
relation, and must be confined, to this category.5

344

Can it then be defended under flexible tests available to the second category?
It seems clearly eliminated from that class because Congress has not left
seizure of private property an open field but has covered it by three
statutory policies inconsistent with this seizure. In cases where the purpose
is to supply needs of the Government itself, two courses are provided: one,
seizure of a plant which fails to comply with obligatory orders placed by the
Government,6 another, condemnation of facilities, including temporary use
under the power of eminent domain.7 The third is applicable where it is the
general economy of the country that is to be protected rather than exclusive
governmental interests.8 None of these were invoked. In choosing a different
and inconsistent way of his own, the President cannot claim that it is
necessitated or invited by failure of Congress to legislate upon the
occasions, grounds and methods for seizure of industrial properties.

345

This leaves the current seizure to be justified only by the severe tests under
the third grouping, where it can be supported only by any remainder of
executive power after subtraction of such powers as Congress may have over the
subject. In short, we can sustain the President only by holding that seizure
of such strike-bound industries is within his domain and beyond control by
Congress. Thus, this Court's first review of such seizures occurs under
circumstances which leave Presidential power most vulnerable to attack and in
the least favorable of possible constitutional postures.

346

I did not suppose, and I am not persuaded, that history leaves it open to
question, at least in the courts, that the executive branch, like the Federal
Government as a whole, possesses only delegated powers. The purpose of the
Constitution was not only to grant power, but to keep it from getting out of
hand. However, because the President does not enjoy unmentioned powers does
not mean that the mentioned ones should be narrowed by a niggardly
construction. Some clauses could be made almost unworkable, as well as
immutable, by refusal to indulge some latitude of interpretation for changing
times. I have heretofore, and do now, give to the enumerated powers the scope
and elasticity afforded by what seem to be reasonable practical implications
instead of the rigidity dictated by a doctrinaire textualism.

347

The Solicitor General seeks the power of seizure in three clauses of the
Executive Article, the first reading, 'The executive Power shall be vested in
a President of the United States of America.' Lest I be thought to exaggerate,
I quote the interpretation which his brief puts upon it: 'In our view, this
clause constitutes a grant of all the executive powers of which the Government
is capable.' If that be true, it is difficult to see why the forefathers
bothered to add several specific items, including some trifling ones.9

348

The example of such unlimited executive power that must have most impressed
the forefathers was the prerogative exercised by George III, and the
description of its evils in the Declaration of Independence leads me to doubt
that they were creating their new Executive in his image. Continental European
examples were no more appealing. And if we seek instruction from our own
times, we can match it only from the executive powers in those governments we
disparagingly describe as totalitarian. I cannot accept the view that this
clause is a grant in bulk of all conceivable executive power but regard it as
an allocation to the presidential office of the generic powers thereafter
stated.

349

The clause on which the Government next relies is that 'The President shall be
Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States * * *.' These
cryptic words have given rise to some of the most persistent controversies in
our constitutional history. Of course, they imply something more than an empty
title. But just what authority goes with the name has plagued Presidential
advisers who would not waive or narrow it by nonassertion yet cannot say where
it begins or ends. It undoubtedly puts the Nation's armed forces under
Presidential command. Hence, this loose appellation is sometimes advanced as
support for any Presidential action, internal or external, involving use of
force, the idea being that it vests power to do anything, anywhere, that can
be done with an army or navy.

350

That seems to be the logic of an argument tendered at our bar that the
President having, on his own responsibility, sent American troops abroad
derives from that act 'affirmative power' to seize the means of producing a
supply of steel for them. To quote, 'Perhaps the most forceful illustrations
of the scope of Presidential power in this connection is the fact that
American troops in Korea, whose safety and effectiveness are so directly
involved here, were sent to the field by an exercise of the President's
constitutional powers.' Thus, it is said he has invested himself with 'war
powers.'

351

I cannot foresee all that it might entail if the Court should indorse this
argument. Nothing in our Constitution is plainer than that declaration of a
war is entrusted only to Congress. Of course, a state of war may in fact exist
without a formal declaration. But no doctrine that the Court could promulgate
would seem to me more sinister and alarming than that a President whose
conduct of foreign affairs is so largely uncontrolled, and often even is
unknown, can vastly enlarge his mastery over the internal affairs of the
country by his own commitment of the Nation's armed forces to some foreign
venture.10 I do not, however, find it necessary or appropriate to consider the
legal status of the Korean enterprise to discountenance argument based on it.

352

Assuming that we are in a war de facto, whether it is or is not a war de jure,
does that empower the Commander-in-Chief to seize industries he thinks
necessary to supply our army? The Constitution expressly places in Congress
power 'to raise and support Armies' and 'to provide and maintain a Navy.'
(Emphasis supplied.) This certainly lays upon Congress primary responsibility
for supplying the armed forces. Congress alone controls the raising of
revenues and their appropriation and may determine in what manner and by what
means they shall be spent for military and naval procurement. I suppose no one
would doubt that Congress can take over war supply as a Government enterprise.
On the other hand, if Congress sess fit to rely on free private enterprise
collectively bargaining with free labor for support and maintenance of our
armed forces can the Executive because of lawful disagreements incidental to
that process, seize the facility for operation upon Government-imposed terms?

353

There are indications that the Constitution did not contemplate that the title
Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy will constitute him also Commander-in-
Chief of the country, its industries and its inhabitants. He has no monopoly
of 'war powers,' whatever they are. While Congress cannot deprive the
President of the command of the army and navy, only Congress can provide him
an army or navy to command. It is also empowered to make rules for the
'Government and Regulation of land and naval forces,' by which it may to some
unknown extent impinge upon even command functions.

354

That military powers of the Commander-in-Chief were not to supersede
representative government of internal affairs seems obvious from the
Constitution and from elementary American history. Time out of mind, and even
now in many parts of the world, a military commander can seize private housing
to shelter his troops. Not so, however, in the United States, for the Third
Amendment says, 'No Soldier shall, in time of peace be quartered in any house,
without the consent of the Owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be
prescribed by law.' Thus, even in war time, his seizure of needed military
housing must be authorized by Congress. It also was expressly left to Congress
to 'provide for calling forth the Militia to execute the Laws of the Union,
suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions * * *.'11 Such a limitation on the
command power, written at a time when the militia rather than a standing army
was contemplated as the military weapon of the Republic, underscores the
Constitution's policy that Congress, not the Executive, should control
utilization of the war power as an instrument of domestic policy. Congress,
fulfilling that function, has authorized the President to use the army to
enforce certain civil rights.12 On the other hand, Congress has forbidden him
to use the army for the purpose of executing general laws except when
expressly authorized by the Constitution or by Act of Congress.13

355

While broad claims under this rubric often have been made, advice to the
President in specific matters usually has carried overtones that powers, even
under this head, are measured by the command functions usual to the topmost
officer of the army and navy. Even then, heed has been taken of any efforts of
Congress to negative his authority.14

356

We should not use this occasion to circumscribe, much less to contract, the
lawful role of the President as Commander-in-Chief. I should indulge the
widest latitude of interpretation to sustain his exclusive function to command
the instruments of national force, at least when turned against the outside
world for the security of our society. But, when it is turned inward, not
because of rebellion but because of a lawful economic struggle between
industry and labor, it should have no such indulgence. His command power is
not such an absolute as might be implied from that office in a militaristic
system but is subject to limitations consistent with a constitutional Republic
whose law and policy-making breanch is a representative Congress. The purpose
of lodging dual titles in one man was to insure that the civilian would
control the military, not to enable the military to subordinate the
presidential office. No penance would ever expiate the sin against free
government of holding that a President can escape control of executive powers
by law through assuming his military role. What the power of command may
include I do not try to envision, but I think it is not a military
prerogative, without support of law, to seize persons or property because they
are important or even essential for the military and naval establishment.

357

The third clause in which the Solicitor General finds seizure powers is that
'he shall take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed * * *.'15 That
authority must be matched against words of the Fifth Amendment that 'No person
shall be * * * deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of
law * * *.' One gives a governmental authority that reaches so far as there is
law, the other gives a private right that authority shall go no farther. These
signify about all there is of the principle that ours is a government of laws,
not of men, and that we submit ourselves to rulers only if under rules.

358

The Solicitor General lastly grounds support of the seizure upon nebulous,
inherent powers never expressly granted but said to have accrued to the office
from the customs and claims of preceding administrations. The plea is for a
resulting power to deal with a crisis or an emergency according to the
necessities of the case, the unarticulated assumption being that necessity
knows no law.

359

Loose and irresponsible use of adjectives colors all non-legal and much legal
discussion of presidential powers. 'Inherent' powers, 'implied' powers,
'incidental' powers, 'plenary' powers, 'war' powers and 'emergency' powers are
used, often interchangeably and without fixed or ascertainable meanings.

360

The vagueness and generality of the clauses that set forth presidential powers
afford a plausible basis for pressures within and without an administration
for presidential action beyond that supported by those whose responsibility it
is to defend his actions in court. The claim of inherent and unrestricted
presidential powers has long been a persuasive dialectical weapon in political
controversy. While it is not surprising that counsel should grasp support from
such unadjudicated claims of power, a judge cannot accept self-serving press
statements of the attorney for one of the interested parties as authority in
answering a constitutional question, even if the advocate was himself. But
prudence has counseled that actual reliance on such nebulous claims stop short
of provoking a judicial test.16

361

The Solicitor General, acknowledging that Congress has never authorized the
seizure here, says practice of prior Presidents has authorized it. He seeks
color of legality from claimed executive precedents, chief of which is
President Roosevelt's seizure of June 9, 1941, of the California plant of the
North American Aviation Company. Its superficial similarities with the present
case, upon analysis, yield to distinctions so decisive that it cannot be
regarded as even a precedent, much less an authority for the present
seizure.17

362

The appeal, however, that we declare the existence of inherent powers ex
necessitate to meet an emergency asks us to do what many think would be wise,
although it is something the forefathers omitted. They knew what emergencies
were, knew the pressures they engender for authoritative action, knew, too,
how they afford a ready pretext for usurpation. We may also suspect that they
suspected that emergency powers would tend to kindle emergencies. Aside from
suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus in time of rebellion
or invasion, when the public safety may require it,18 they made no express
provision for exercise of extraordinary authority because of a crisis.19 I do
not think we rightfully may so amend their work, and, if we could, I am not
convinced it would be wise to do so, although many modern nations have
forthrightly recognized that war and economic crises may upset the normal
balance between liberty and authority. Their experience with emergency powers
may not be irrelevant to the argument here that we should say that the
Executive, of his own volition, can invest himself with undefined emergency
powers.

363

Germany, after the First World War, framed the Weimar Constitution, designed
to secure her liberties in the Western tradition. However, the President of
the Republic, without concurrence of the Reichstag, was empowered temporarily
to suspend any or all individual rights if public safety and order were
seriously distrubed or endangered. This proved a temptation to every
government, whatever its shade of opinion, and in 13 years suspension of
rights was invoked on more than 250 occasions. Finally, Hitler persuaded
President Von Hindenberg to suspend all such rights, and they were never
restored.20

364

The French Republic provided for a very different kind of emergency government
known as the 'state of siege.' It differed from the German emergency
dictatorship, particularly in that emergency powers could not be assumed at
will by the Executive but could only be granted as a parliamentary measure.
And it did not, as in Germany, result in a suspension or abrogation of law but
was a legal institution governed by special legal rules and terminable by
parliamentary authority.21

365

Great Britain also has fought both World Wars under a sort of temporary
dictatorship created by legislation.22 As Parliament is not bound by written
constitutional limitations, it established a crisis government simply by
delegation to its Ministers of a larger measure than usual of its own
unlimited power, which is exercised under its supervision by Ministers whom it
may dismiss. This has been called the 'highwater mark in the voluntary
surrender of liberty,' but, as Churchill put it, 'Parliament stands custodian
of these surrendered liberties, and its most sacred duty will be to restore
them in their fullness when victory has crowned our exertions and our
perseverance.'23 Thus, parliamentary control made emergency powers compatible
with freedom.

366

This contemporary foreign experience may be inconclusive as to the wisdom of
lodging emergency powers somewhere in a modern government. But it suggests
that emergency powers are consistent with free government only when their
control is lodged elsewhere than in the Executive who exercises them. That is
the safeguard that would be nullified by our adoption of the 'inherent powers'
formula. Nothing in my experience convinces me that such risks are warranted
by any real necessity, although such powers would, of course, be an executive
convenience.

367

In the practical working of our Government we already have evolved a technique
within the framework of the Constitution by which normal executive powers may
be considerably expanded to meet an emergency. Congress may and has granted
extraordinary authorities which lie dormant in normal times but may be called
into play by the Executive in war or upon proclamation of a national
emergency. In 1939, upon congressional request, the Attorney General listed
ninety-nine such separate statutory grants by Congress of emergency or war-
time executive powers.24 They were invoked from time to time as need appeared.
Under this procedure we retain Government by law--special, temporary law,
perhaps, but law nonetheless. The public may know the extent and limitations
of the powers that can be asserted, and persons affected may be informed from
the statute of their rights and duties.

368

In view of the ease, expedition and safety with which Congress can grant and
has granted large emergency powers, certainly ample to embrace this crisis, I
am quite unimpressed with the argument that we should affirm possession of
them without statute. Such power either has no beginning or it has no end. If
it exists, it need submit to no legal restraint. I am not alarmed that it
would plunge us straightway into dictatorship, but it is at least a step in
that wrong direction.

369

As to whether there is imperative necessity for such powers, it is relevant to
note the gap that exists between the President's paper powers and his real
powers. The Constitution does not disclose the measure of the actual controls
wielded by the modern presidential office. That instrument must be understood
as an Eighteenth-Century sketch of a government hoped for, not as a blueprint
of the Government that is. Vast accretions of federal power, eroded from that
reserved by the States, have magnified the scope of presidential activity.
Subtle shifts take place in the centers of real power that do not show on the
face of the Constitution.

370

Executive power has the advantage of concentration in a single head in those
choice the whole Nation has a part, making him the focus of public hopes and
expectations. In drama, magnitude and finality his decisions so far overshadow
any others that almost alone he fills the public eye and ear. No othe
personality in public life can begin to compete with him in access to the
public mind through modern methods of communications. By his prestige as head
of state and his influence upon public opinion he exerts a leverage upon those
who are supposed to check and balance his power which often cancels their
effectiveness.

371

Moreover, rise of the party system has made a significant extraconstitutional
supplement to real executive power. No appraisal of his necessities is
realistic which overlooks that he heads a political system as well as a legal
system. Party loyalties and interests, sometimes more binding than law, extend
his effective control into branches of government other than his own and he
often may win, as a political leader, what he cannot command under the
Constitution. Indeed, Woodrow Wilson, commenting on the President as leader
both of his party and of the Nation, observed, 'If he rightly interpret the
national thought and boldly insist upon it, he is irresistible. * * * His
office is anything he has the sagacity and force to make it.'25 I cannot be
brought to believe that this country will suffer if the Court refuses further
to aggrandize the presidential office, already so potent and so relatively
immune from judicial review,26 at the expense of Congress.

372

But I have no illusion that any decision by this Court can keep power in the
hands of Congress if it is not wise and timely in meeting its problems. A
crisis that challenges the President equally, or perhaps primarily, challenges
Congress. If not good law, there was worldly wisdom in the maxim attributed to
Napoleon that 'The tools belong to the man who can use them.' We may say that
power to legislate for emergencies belongs in the hands of Congress, but only
Congress itself can prevent power from slipping through its fingers.

373

The essence of our free Government is 'leave to live by no man's leave,
underneath the law'--to be governed by those impersonal forces which we call
law. Our Government is fashioned to fulfill this concept so far as humanly
possible. The Executive, except for recommendation and veto, has no
legislative power. The executive action we have here originates in the
individual will of the President and represents an exercise of authority
without law. No one, perhaps not even the President, knows the limits of the
power he may seek to exert in this instance and the parties affected cannot
learn the limit of their rights. We do not know today what powers over labor
or property would be claimed to flow from Government possession if we should
legalize it, what rights to compensation would be claimed or recognized, or on
what contingency it would end. With all its defects, delays and
inconveniences, men have discovered no technique for long preserving free
government except that the Executive be under the law, and that the law be
made by parliamentary deliberations.

374

Such institutions may be destined to pass away. But it is the duty of the
Court to be last, not first, to give them up.27

375

Mr. Justice BURTON, concurring in both the opinion and judgment of the Court.

My position may be summarized as follows:

376

The validity of the President's order of seizure is at issue and ripe for
decision. Its validity turns upon its relation to the constitutional division
of governmental power between Congress and the President.

377

The Constitution has delegated to Congress power to authorize action to meet a
national emergency of the kind we face.1 Aware of this responsibility,
Congress has responded to it. It has provided at least two procedures for the
use of the President.

378

It has outlined one in the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947, better known
as the Taft-Hartley Act. The accuracy with which Congress there describes the
present emergency demonstrates its applicability. It says:

379

'Whenever in the opinion of the President of the United States, a threatened
or actual strike or lock-out affecting an entire industry or a substantial
part thereof engaged in trade, commerce, transportation, transmission, or
communication among the several States or with foreign nations, or engaged in
the production of goods for commerce, will, if permitted to occur or to
continue, imperil the national health or safety, he may appoint a board of
inquiry to inquire into the issues involved in the dispute and to make a
written report to him within such time as he shall prescribe. * * *'2

380

In that situation Congress has authorized not only negotiation, conciliation
and impartial inquiry but also a 60-day cooling-off period under injunction,
followed by 20 days for a secret ballot upon the final offer of settlement and
then by recommendations from the President to Congress.3

381

For the purposes of this case the most significant feature of that Act is its
omission of authority to seize an affected industy. The debate preceding its
passage demonstrated the significance of that omission. Collective bargaining,
rather than governmental seizure, was to be relied upon. Seizure was not to be
resorted to without specific congressional authority. Congress reserved to
itself the opportunity to authorize seizure to meet particular emergencies.4

382

The President, however, chose not to use the Taft-Hartley procedure. He chose
another course, also authorized by Congress. He referred the controversy to
the Wage Stabilization Board.5 If that course had led to a settlement of the
labor dispute, it would have avoided the need for other action. It, however,
did not do so.

383

Now it is contended that although the President did not follow the procedure
authorized by the Taft-Hartley Act, his substituted procedure served the same
purpose and must be accepted as it equivalent. Without appraising that
equivalence, it is enough to point out that neither procedure carried
statutory authority for the seizure of private industries in the manner now at
issue.6 The exhaustion of both procedures fails to cloud the clarity of the
congressional reservation of seizure for its own consideration.

384

The foregoing circumstances distinguish this emergency from one in which
Congress takes no action and outlines no governmental policy. In the case
before us, Congress authorized a procedure which the President declined to
follow. Instead, he followed another procedure which he hoped might eliminate
the need for the first. Upon its failure, he issued an executive order to
seize the steel properties in the fact of the reserved right of Congress to
adopt or reject that course as a matter of legislative policy.

385

This brings us to a further crucial question. Does not President, in such a
situation, have inherent constitutional power to seize private property which
makes congressional action in relation thereto unnecessary? We find no such
power available to him under the present circumstances. The present situation
is not comparable to that of an imminent invasion or threatened attack. We do
not face the issue of what might be the President's constitutional power to
meet such catastrophic situations. Nor is it claimed that the current seizure
is in the nature of a military command addressed by the President, as
Commander-in-Chief, to a mobilized nation waging, or imminently threatened
with, total war.7

386

The controlling fact here is that Congress, within its constitutionally
delegated power, has prescribed for the President specific procedures,
exclusive of seizure, for his use in meeting the present type of emergency.
Congress has reserved to itself the right to determine where and when to
authorize the seizure of property in meeting such an emergency. Under these
circumstances, the President's order of April 8 invaded the jurisdiction of
Congress. It violated the essence of the principle of the separation of
governmental powers. Accordingly, the injunction against its effectiveness
should be sustained.

387

Mr. Justice CLARK, concurring in the judgment of the Court.

388

One of this Court's first pronouncements upon the powers of the President
under the Constitution was made by Chief Justice John Marshall some one
hundred and fifty years ago. In Little v. Barreme,1 he used this
characteristically clear language in discussing the power of the President to
instruct the seizure of the 'Flying-Fish,' a vessel bound from a French port:
'It is by no means clear that the President of the United States whose high
duty it is to 'take care that the laws be faithfully executed,' and who is
commander in chief of the armies and navies of the United States, might not,
without any special authority for that purpose, in the then existing state of
things, have empowered the officers commanding the armed vessels of the United
States, to seize and send into port for adjudication, American vessels which
were forfeited by being engaged in this illicit commerce. But when it is
observed that (an act of Congress) gives a special authority to seize on the
high seas, and limits that authority to the seizure of vessels bound or
sailing to a French port, the legislature seem to have prescribed that the
manner in which this law shall be carried into execution, was to exclude a
seizure of any vessel not bound to a French port.'2 Accordingly, a unanimous
Court held that the President's instructions had been issued without authority
and that they could not 'legalize an act which without those instructions
would have been a plain trespass.' I know of no subsequent holding of this
Court to the contrary.3

389

The limits of presidential power are obscure. However, Article II, no less
than Article I, is part of 'a constitution intended to endure for ages to
come, and, consequently, to be adapted to the various crises of human
affairs.'4 Some of our Presidents, such as Lincoln, 'felt that measures
otherwise unconstitutional might become lawful by becoming indispensable to
the preservation of the Constitution through the preservation of the nation.'5
Others, such as Theodore Roosevelt, thought the President to be capable, as a
'steward' of the people, of exerting all power save that which is specifically
prohibited by the Constitution or the Congress.6 In my view--taught me not
only by the decision of Chief Justice Marshall in Little v. Barreme, 2 Cranch
170, 2 L.Ed. 243, but also by a score of other pronouncements of distinguished
members of this bench--the Constitution does grant to the President extensive
authority in times of grave and imperative national emergency. In fact, to my
thinking, such a grant may well be necessary to the very existence of the
Constitution itself. As Lincoln aptly said, '(is) it possible to lose the
nation and yet preserve the Constitution?'7 In describing this authority I
care not whether one calls it 'residual,' 'inherent,' 'moral, 'implied,'
'aggregate,? 'emergency,' or otherwise. I am of the conviction that those who
have had the grantifying experience of being the President's lawyer have used
one or more of these adjectives only with the utmost of sincerity and the
highest of purpose.

390

I conclude that where Congress has laid down specific procedures to deal with
the type of crisis confronting the President, he must follow those procedures
in meeting the crisis; but that in the absence of such action by Congress, the
President's independent power to act depends upon the gravity of the situation
contronting the nation. I cannot sustain the seizure in question because here,
as in Little v. Barreme, 2 Crahch 170, 2 L.Ed. 243, Congfress had prescribed
methods to be followed by the President in meeting the emergency at hand.

391

Three statutory procecures were available: those provided in the Defense
Production Act of 1950, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 2061 et seq., the Labor
Management Relations Act, 29 U.S.C.A. ยง 141 et seq., and the Selective Service
Act of 1948, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 451 et seq. In this case the President
invoked the first of these procedures; he did not invoke the other two.

392

The Defense Production Act of 1950 provides for mediation of labor disputes
affecting national defense. Under this statutory authorization, the President
has established the Wage Stabilization Board. The Defense Production Act,
however, grants the President no power to seize real property except through
ordinary condemnation proceedings, which were not used here, and creates no
sanctions for the settlement of labor disputes.

393

The Labor Management Relations Act, commonly known as the Taft-Hartley Act,
includes provisions adopted for the purpose of dealing with nationwide
strikes. They establish a procedure whereby the President may appoint a board
of inquiry and thereafter, in proper cases, seek injunctive relief for an
80-day period against a threatened work stoppage. The President can invoke
that procedure whenever, in his opinion, 'a threatened or actual strike * * *
affecting an entire industry * * * will, if permitted to occur or to continue,
imperil the national health or safety.'8 At the time that Act was passed,
Congress specifically rejected a proposal to empower the President to seize
any 'plant, mine, or facility' in which a threatened work stoppage would, in
his judgment, 'imperil the public health or security.'9 Instead, the Taft-
Hartley Act directed the President, in the event a strike had not been settled
during the 80-day injunction period, to submit to Congress 'a full and
comprehensive report * * * together with such recommendations as he may see
fit to make for consideration and appropriate action.'10 The legislative
history of the Act demonstrates Congress' belief that the 80-day period would
afford it adequate opportunity to determine whether special legislation should
be enacted to meet the emergency at hand.11

394

The Selective Service Act of 1948 gives the President specific authority to
seize plants which fail to produce goods required by the armed forces or the
Atomic Energy Commission for national defense purposes. The Act provides that
when a producer from whom the President has ordered such goods 'refuses or
fails' to fill the order within a period of time prescribed by the President,
the President may take immediate possession of the producer's plant.12 This
language is significantly broader than that used in the National Defense Act
of 1916 and the Selective Training and Service Act of 1940, which provided for
seizure when a producer 'refused' to supply essential defense materials, but
not when he 'failed' to do so.13

395

These three statutes furnish the guideposts for decision in this case. Prior
to seizing the steel mills on April 8 the President had exhausted the
mediation procedures of the Defense Production Act through the Wage
Stabilization Board. Use of those procedures had failed to avert the impending
crisis; however, it had resulted in a 99-day postponement of the strike. The
Government argues that this accomplished more than the maximum 80-day waiting
period possible under the sanctions of the Taft-Hartley Act, and therefore
amounted to compliance with the substance of that Act. Even if one were to
accept this somewhat hyperbolic conclusion, the hard fact remains that neither
the Defense Production Act nor Taft-Hartley authorized the seizure challenged
here, and the Government made no effort to comply with the procedures
established by the Selective Service Act of 1948, a statute which expressly
authorizes seizures when producers fail to supply necessary defense mate
riel.14

396

For these reasons I concur in the judgment of the Court. As Justice Story once
said: 'For the executive department of the government, this court entertain
the most entire respect; and amidst the multiplicity of cares in that
department, it may, without any violation of decorum, be presumed, that
sometimes there may be an inaccurate construction of a law. It is our duty to
expound the laws as we find them in the records of state; and we cannot, when
called upon by the citizens of the country, refuse our opinion, however it may
differ from that of very great authorities.'15

397

Mr. Chief Justice VINSON, with whom Mr. Justice REED and Mr. Justice MINTON
join, dissenting.

398

The President of the United States directed the Secretary of Commerce to take
temporary possession of the Nation's steel mills during the existing emergency
because 'a work stoppage would immediately jeopardize and imperil our national
defense and the defense of those joined with us in resisting aggression, and
would add to the continuing danger of our soldiers, sailors and airmen engaged
in combat in the field.' The District Court ordered the mills returned to
their private owners on the ground that the President's acion was beyond his
powers under the Constitution.

399

This Court affirms. Some members of the Court are of the view that the
President is without power to act in time of crisis in the absence of express
statutory authorization. Other members of the Court affirm on the basis of
their reading of certain statutes. Because we cannot agree that affirmance is
proper on any ground, and because of the transcending importance of the
questions presented not only in this critical litigation but also to the
powers the President and of future Presidents to act in time of crisis, we are
compelled to register this dissent.

I.

400

In passing upon the question of Presidential powers in this case, we must
first consider the context in which those powers were exercised.

401

Those who suggest that this is a case involving extraordinary powers should be
mindful that these are extraordinary times. A world not yet recovered from the
devastation of World War II has been forced to face the threat of another and
more terrifying global conflict.

402

Accepting in full measure its responsibility in the world community, the
United States was instrumental in securing adoption of the United Nations
Charter, approved by the Senate by a vote of 89 to 2. The first purpose of the
United Nations is to 'maintain international peace and security, and to that
end: to take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of the peace, * * *.'1 In 1950, when the United Nations called upon
member nations 'to render every assistance' to repel aggression in Korea, the
United States furnished its vigorous support.2 For almost two full years, our
armed forces have been fighting in Korea, suffering casualties of over 108,000
men. Hostilities have not abated. The 'determination of the United Nations to
continue its action in Korea to meet the aggression' has been reaffirmend.3
Congressional support of the action in Korea has been manifested by provisions
for increased military manpower and equipment and for economic stabilization,
as hereinafter described.

403

Further efforts to protect the free world from aggression are found in the
congressional enactments of the Truman Plan for assistance to Greece and
Turkey4 and the Marshall Plan for economic aid needed to build up the strength
of our friends in Western Europe.5 In 1949, the Senate approved the North
Atlantic Treaty under which each member nation agrees that an armed attack
against one is an armed attack against all.6 Congress immediately implemented
the North Atlantic Treaty by authorizing military assistance to nations
dedicated to the principles of mutual security under the United Nations
Charter.7 The concept of mutual security recently has been extended by treaty
to friends in the Pacific.8

404

Our treaties represent not merely legal obligations but show congressional
recognition that mutual security for the free world is the best security
against the threat of aggression on a global scale. The need for mutual
security is shown by the very size of the armed forces outside the free world.
Defendant's brief informs us that the Soviet Unin maintains the largest air
force in the world and maintains g round forces much larger than those
presently available to the United States and the countries joined with us in
mutual security arrangements. Constant international tensions are cited to
demonstrate how precarious is the peace.

405

Even this brief review of our responsibilities in the world community
discloses the enormity of our undertaking. Success of these measures may, as
has often been observed, dramatically influence the lives of many generations
of the world's peoples yet unborn. Alert to our responsibilities, which
coincide with our own self preservation through mutual security, Congress has
enacted a large body of implementing legislation. As an illustration of the
magnitude of the over-all program, Congress has appropriated $130 billion for
our own defense and for military assistance to our allies since the June,
1950, attack in Korea.

406

In the Mutual Security Act of 1951, Congress authorized 'military, economic,
and technical assistance to friendly countries to strengthen the mutual
security and individual and collective defenses of the free world, * * *.'9
Over $5 1/2 billion were appropriated for military assistance for fiscal year
1952, the bulk of that amount to be devoted to purchase of military
equipment.10 A request for over $7 billion for the same purpose for fiscal
year 1953 is currently pending in Congress.11 In addition to direct shipment
of military equipment to nations of the free world, defense production in
those countries relies upon shipment of machine tools and allocation of steel
tonnage from the United States.12

407

Congress also directed the President to build up our own defenses. Congress,
recognizing the 'grim fact * * * that the United States is now engaged in a
struggle for survival' and that 'it is imperative that we now take those
necessary steps to make our strength equal to the peril of the hour,' granted
authority to draft men into the armed forces.13 As a result, we now have over
3,500,000 men in our armed forces.14

408

Appropriations for the Department of Defense, which had averaged less than $13
billion per year for the three years before attack in Korea, were increased by
Congress to $48 billion for fiscal year 1951 and to $60 billion for fiscal
year 1952.15 A request for $51 billion for the Department of Defense for
fiscal year 1953 is currently pending in Congress.16 The bulk of the increase
is for military equipment and supplies--guns, tanks, ships, planes and
ammunition--all of which require steel. Other defense programs requiring great
quantities of steel include the large scale expansion of facilities for the
Atomic Energy Commission17 and the expansion of the Nation's productive
capacity affirmatively encouraged by Congress.18

409

Congress recognized the impact of these defense programs upon the economy.
Following the attack in Korea, the President asked for authority to
requisition property and to allocate and fix priorities for scarce goods. In
the Defense Production Act of 1950, Congress granted the powers requested and,
in addition, granted power to stabilize prices and wages and to provide for
settlement of labor disputes arising in the defense program.19 The Defense
Production Act was extended in 1951, a Senate Committee noting that in the
dislocation caused by the programs for purchase of military equipment 'lies
the seed of an economic disaster that might well destroy the military might we
are straining to build.'20 Significantly, the Committee examined the problem
'in terms of just one commodity, steel,' and found 'a graphic picture of the
over-all inflationary danger growing out of reduced civilian supplies and
rising incomes.' Even before Korea, steel production at levels above
theoretical 100% capacity was not capable of supplying civilian needs alone.
Since Korea, the tremendous military demand for steel has far exceeded the
increases in productive capacity. This Committee emphasized that the shortage
of steel, even with the mills operating at full capacity, coupled with
increased civilian purchasing power, presented grave danger of disastrous
inflation.21

410

The President has the duty to execute the foregoing legislative programs.
Their successful execution depends upon continued production of steel and
stabilized prices for steel. Accordingly, when the collective bargaining
agreements between the Nation's steel producers and their employees,
represented by the United Steel Workers, were due to expire on December 31,
1951, and a strike shutting down the entire basic steel industry was
threatened, the President acted to avert a complete shutdown of steel
production. On December 22, 1951, he certified the dispute to the Wage
Stabilization Board, requesting that the Board investigate the dispute and
promptly report its recommendation as to fair and equitable terms of
settlement. The Union complied with the President's request and delayed its
threatened strike while the dispute was before the Board. After a special
Board panel had conducted hearings and submitted a report, the full Wage
Stabilization Board submitted its report and recommendations to the President
on March 20, 1952.

411

The Board's report was acceptable to the Union but was rejected by plaintiffs.
The Union gave notice of its intention to strike as of 12:01 a.m., April 9,
1952, but bargaining between the parties continued with hope of settlement
until the evening of April 8, 1952. After bargaining had failed to avert the
threatened shutdown of steel production, the President issued the following
Executive Order:

412

'Whereas on December 16, 1950, I proclaimed the existence of a national
emergency which requires that the military, naval, air, and civilian defenses
of this country be strengthened as speedily as possible to the end that we may
be able to repel any and all threats against our national security and to
fulfill our responsibilities in the efforts being made throughout the United
Nations and otherwise to bring about a lasting peace; and

413

'Whereas American fighting men and fighting men of other nations of the United
Nations are now engaged in deadly combat with the forces of aggression in
Korea, and forces of the United States are stationed elsewhere overseas for
the purpose of participating in the defense of the Atlantic Community against
aggression; and

414

'Whereas the weapons and other materials needed by our armed forces and by
those joined with us in the defense of the free world are produced to a great
extent in this country, and steel is an indispensable component of
substantially all of such weapons and materials; and 'Whereas steel is
likewise indispenable to the carrying out of programs of the Atomic Energy
Comm ission of vital importance to our defense efforts; and

415

'Whereas a continuing and uninterrupted supply of steel is also indispensable
to the maintenance of the economy of the United States, upon which our
military strength depends; and

416

'Whereas a controversy has arisen between certain companies in the United
States producing and fabricating steel and the elements thereof and certain of
their workers represented by the United Steel Workers of America, CIO,
regarding terms and conditions of employment; and

417

'Whereas the controversy has not been settled through the processes of
collective bargaining or through the efforts of the Government, including
those of the Wage Stabilization Board, to which the controversy was referred
on December 22, 1951, pursuant to Executive Order No. 10233, and a strike has
been called for 12:01 A.M., April 9, 1952; and

418

'Whereas a work stoppage would immediately jeopardize and imperil our national
defense and the defense of those joined with us in resisting aggression, and
would add to the continuing danger of our soldiers, sailors, and airmen
engaged in combat in the field; and

419

'Whereas in order to assure the continued availability of steel and steel
products during the existing emergency, it is necessary that the United States
take possession of and operate the plants, facilities, and other property of
the said companies as hereinafter provided:

420

'Now, Therefore, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the Constitution
and laws of the United States, and as President of the United States and
Commander in Chief of the armed forces of the United States, it is hereby
ordered as follows:

421

'1. The Secretary of Commerce is hereby authorized and directed to take
possession of all or such of the plants, facilities, and other property of the
companies named in the list attached hereto, or any part thereof, as he may
deem necessary in the interests of national defense; and to operate or to
arrange for the operation thereof and to do all things necessary for, or
incidental to, such operation * * *.'22

422

The next morning, April 9, 1952, the President addressed the following Message
to Congress:

423

'To the Congress of the United States:

424

'The Congress is undoubtedly aware of the recent events which have taken place
in connection with the management-labor dispute in the steel industry. These
events culminated in the action which was taken last night to provide for
temporary operation of the steel mills by the Government.

425

'I took this action with the utmost reluctance. The idea of Government
operation of the steel mills is thoroughly distasteful to me and I want to see
it ended as soon as possible. However, in the situation which confronted me
yesterday, I felt that I could make no other choice. The other alternatives
appeared to be even worse--so much worse that I could not accept them.

426

'One alternative would have been to permit a shut-down in the steel industry.
The effects of such a shut-down would have been so immediate and damaging with
respect to our efforts to support our Armed Forces and to protect our national
security that it made this alternative unthinkable.

427

'The only way that I know of, other than Government operation, by which a
steel shut-down could have been avoided was to grant the demands of the steel
industry for a large price increase. I believed and the officials in charge of
our stabilization agencies believed that this would have wrecked our
stabilization program. I was unwilling to accept the incalculable damage which
might be done to our country by following such a course.

428

'Accordingly, it was my judgment that Government operation of the steel mills
for a temporary period was the least undesirable of the courses of action
which lay open. In the circumstances, I believed it to be, and now believe it
to be, my duty and within my powers as President to follow that courseof
action.

429

'It may be that the Congress will deem some othe r course to be wiser. It may
be that the Congress will feel we should give in to the demands of the steel
industry for an exorbitant price increase and take the consequences so far as
resulting inflation is concerned.

430

'It may be that the Congress will feel the Government should try to force the
steel workers to continue to work for the steel companies for another long
period, without a contract, even though the steel workers have already
voluntarily remained at work without a contract for 100 days in an effort to
reach an orderly settlement of their differences with management.

431

'It may even be that the Congress will feel that we should permit a shutdown
of the steel industry, although that would immediately endanger the safety of
our fighting forces abroad and weaken the whole structure of our national
security.

432

'I do not believe the Congress will favor any of these courses of action, but
that is a matter for the Congress to determine.

433

'It may be, on the other hand, that the Congress will wish to pass legislation
establishing specific terms and conditions with reference to the operation of
the steel mills by the Government. Sound legislation of this character might
be very desirable.

434

'On the basis of the facts that are known to me at this time, I do not believe
that immediate congressional action is essential; but I would, of course, be
glad to cooperate in developing any legislative proposals which the Congress
may wish to consider.

435

'If the Congress does not deem it necessary to act at this time, I shall
continue to do all that is within my power to keep the steel industry
operating and at the same time make every effort to bring about a settlement
of the dispute so the mills can be returned to their private owners as soon as
possible.'23

436

Twelve days passed without action by Congress. On April 21, 1952, the
President sent a letter to the President of the Senate in which he again
described the purpose and need for his action and again stated his position
that 'The Congress can, if it wishes, reject the course of action I have
followed in this matter.'24 Congress has not so acted to this date.

437

Meanwhile, plaintiffs instituted this action in the District Court to compel
defendant to return possession of the steel mills seized under Executive Order
10340. In this litigation for return of plaintiffs' properties, we assume that
defendant Charles Sawyer is not immune from judicial restraint and that
plaintiffs are entitled to equitable relief if we find that the Executive
Order under which defendant acts is unconstitutional. We also assume without
deciding that the courts may go behind a President'sfinding of fact that an
emergency exists. But there is not the slightest basis for suggesting that the
President's finding in this case can be undermined. Plaintiffs moved for a
preliminary injunction before answer or hearing. Defendant opposed the motion,
filing uncontroverted affidavits of Government officials describing the facts
underlying the President's order.

438

Secretary of Defense Lovett swore that 'a work stoppage in the steel industry
will result immediately in serious curtailment of production of essential
weapons and munitions of all kinds.' He illustrated by showing that 84% of the
national production of certain alloy steel is currently used for production of
military-end items and that 35% of total production of another form of steel
goes into ammunition, 80% of such ammunition now going to Korea. The Secretary
of Defense stated that: 'We are holding the line (in Korea) with ammunition
and not with the lives of our troops.'

439

Affidavits of the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, the Secretary of
the Interior, defendant as Secretary of Commerce, and the Administrators of
the Defense Production Administration, the National Production Authority, the
General Servies Administration and the Defense Transport Administration wer e
also filed in the District Court. These affidavits disclose an enormous demand
for steel in such vital defense programs as the expansion of facilities in
atomic energy, petroleum, power, transportation and industrial production,
including steel production. Those charged with administering allocations and
priorities swore to the vital part steel production plays in our economy. The
affidavits emphasize the critical need for steel in our defense program, the
absence of appreciable inventories of steel, and the drastic results of any
interruption in steel production.

440

One is not here called upon even to consider the possibility of executive
seizure of a farm, a corner grocery store or even a single industrial plant.
Such considerations arise only when one ignores the central fact of this case
--that the Nation's entire basic steel production would have shut down
completely if there had been no Government seizure. Even ignoring for the
moment whatever confidential information the President may possess as 'the
Nation's organ for foreign affairs,'25 the uncontroverted affidavits in this
record amply support the finding that 'a work stoppage would immediately
jeopardize and imperil our national defense.'

441

Plaintiffs do not remotely suggest any basis for rejecting the President's
finding that any stoppage of steel production would immediately place the
Nation in peril. Moreover, even self-generated doubts that any stoppage of
steel production constitutes an emergency are of little comfort here. The
Union and the plaintiffs bargained for 6 months with over 100 issues in
dispute--issues not limited to wage demands but including the union shop and
other matters of principle between the parties. At the time of seizure there
was not, and there is not now, the slightest evidence to justify the belief
that any strike will be of short duration. The Union and the steel companies
may well engage in a lengthy struggle. Plaintiff's counsel tells us that
'sooner or later' the mills will operate again. That May satisfy the steel
companies and, perhaps, the Union. But our soldiers and our allies will hardly
be cheered with the assurance that the ammunition upon which their lives
depend will be forthcoming--'sooner or later,' or, in other words, 'too little
and too late.' Accordingly, if the President has any power under the
Constitution to meet a critical situation in the absence of express statutory
authorization, there is no basis whatever for criticizing the exercise of such
power in this case.

II.

442

The steel mills were seized for a public use. The power of eminent domain,
invoked in that case, is an essential attribute of sovereignty and has long
been recognized as a power of the Federal Government. Kohl v. United States,
1876, 91 U.S. 367, 23 L.Ed. 449. Plaintiffs cannot complain that any provision
in the Constitution prohibits the exercise of the power of eminent domain in
this case. The Fifth Amendment provides: 'nor shall private property be taken
for public use, without just compensation.' It is no bar to this seizure for,
if the taking is not otherwise unlawful, plaintiffs are assured of receiving
the required just compensation. United States v. Pewee Coal Co., 1951, 341
U.S. 114, 71 S.Ct. 670, 95 L.Ed. 809.

443

Admitting that the Government could seize the mills, plaintiffs claim that the
implied power of eminent domain can be exercised only under an Act of
Congress; under no circumstances, they say, can that power be exercised by the
President unless he can point to an express provision in enabling legislation.
This was the view adopted by the District Judge when he granted the
preliminary injunction. Without an answer, without hearing evidence, he
determined the issue on the basis of his 'fixed conclusion * * * that
defendant's acts are illegal' because the President's only course in the face
of an emergency is to pr esent the matter to Congress and await the final
passage of legislation which will enable the Government to cope with
threatened disaster.

444

Under this view, the President is left powerless at the very moment when the
need for action may be most pressing and when no one, other than he, is
immediately capable of action. Under this view, he is left powerless because a
power not expressly given to Congress is nevertheless found to rest
exclusively with Congress.

445

Consideration of this view of executive impotence calls for further
examination of the nature of the separation of powers under our tripartite
system of Government.

The Constitution provides:

446

Art. I,

447

Section 1. 'All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a
Congress of the United States, * * *.'

448

Art. II,

449

Section 1. 'The executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United
States of America. * * *.'

450

Section 2. 'The President shall be Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of
the United States, * * *

451

'He shall have Power, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, to
make Treaties, provided two thirds of the Senators present concur; * * *.'

452

Section 3. 'He shall from time to time give to the Congress Information of the
State of the Union, and recommend to their Consideration such Measures as he
shall judge necessary and expedient; * * * he shall take Care that the Laws be
faithfully executed, * * *.'

453

Art. III,

454

Section 1. 'The judicial Power of the United States shall be vested in one
supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to
time ordain and establish.'

455

The whole of the 'executive Power' is vested in the President. Before entering
office, the President swears that he 'will faithfully execute the Office of
President of the United States, and will to the best of (his) Ability,
preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States.' Art. II,
ยง 1.

456

This comprehensive grant of the executive power to a single person was
bestowed soon after the country had thrown the yoke of monarchy. Only by
instilling initiative and vigor in all of the three departments of Government,
declared Madison, could tyranny in any from be avoided.26 Hamilton added:
'Energy in the Executive is a leading character in the definition of good
government. It is essential to the protection of the community against foreign
attack; it is not less essential to the steady administration of the laws; to
the protection of property against those irregular and highhanded combinations
which sometimes interrupt the ordinary course of justice; to the security of
liberty against the enterprises and assaults of ambition, of faction, and of
anarchy.'27 It is thus apparent that the Presidency was deliberately fashioned
as an office of power and independence. Of course, the Framers created no
autocrat capable of arrogating any power unto himself at any time. But neither
did they create an automaton impotent to exercise the powers of Government at
a time when the survival of the Republic itself may be at stake.

457

In passing upon the grave constitutional question presented in this case, we
must never forget, as Chief Justice Marshall admonished, that the Constitution
is 'intended to endure for ages to come, and consequently, to be adapted to
the various crises of human affairs,' and that '(i)ts means are adequate to
its ends.'28 Cases do arise presenting questions which could not have been
foreseen by the Framers. In such cases, the Constitution has been treated as a
living document adaptable to new situations.29 But we are not called upon
today to expand the Constitution to meet a new situation. For, in this case,
we need only look to history and time-honored principles of constitutional law
--principles that have been applied consistently by all branches of the
Government thrughout our history. It is those who assert the invalidity of t
he Executive Order who seek to amend the Constitution in this case.

III.

458

A review of executive action demonstrates that our Presidents have on many
occasions exhibited the leadership contemplated by the Framers when they made
the President Commander in Chief, and imposed upon him the trust to 'take Care
that the Laws be faithfully executed.' With or without explicit statutory
authorization, Presidents have at such times dealt with national emergencies
by acting promptly and resolutely to enforce legislative programs, at least to
save those programs until Congress could act. Congress and the courts have
responded to such executive initiative with consistent approval.

459

Our first President displayed at once the leadership contemplated by the
Framers. When the national revenue laws were openly flouted in some sections
of Pennsylvania, President Washington, without waiting for a call from the
state government, summoned the militia and took decisive steps to secure the
faithful execution of the laws.30 When international disputes engendered by
the French revolution threatened to involve this country in war, and while
congressional policy remained undertain, Washington issued his Proclamation of
Neutrality. Hamilton, whose defense of the Proclamation has endured the test
of time, invoked the argument that the Executive has the duty to do that which
will preserve peace until Congress acts and, in addition, pointed to the need
for keeping the Nation informed of the requirements of existing laws and
treaties as part of the faithful execution of the laws.31

460

President John Adams issued a warrant for the arrest of Jonathan Robbins in
order to execute the extradition provisions of a treaty. This action was
challenged in Congress on the ground that no specific statute prescribed the
method to be used in executing the treaty. John Marshall, then a member of the
House of Representatives, made the following argument in support of the
President's action:

461

'The treaty, which is a law, enjoins the performance of a particular object.
The person who is to perform this object is marked out by the Constitution,
since the person is named who conducts the foreign intercourse, and is to take
care that the laws be faithfully executed. The means by which it is to be
performed, the force of the nation, are in the hands of this person. Ought not
this person to perform the object, although the particular mode of using the
means has not been prescribed? Congress, unquestionably may prescribe the
mode, and Congress may devolve on others the whole execution of the contract;
but, till this be done, it seems the duty of the Executive department to
execute the contract by any means it possesses.'32

462

Efforts in Congress to discredit the President for his action failed.33 Almost
a century later, this Court had occasion to give its express approval to 'the
masterly and conclusive argument of John Marshall.'34

463

Jefferson's initiative in the Louisiana Purchase, the Monroe Doctrine, and
Jackson's removal of Government deposits from the Bank of the United States
further serve to demonstrate by deed what the Framers described by word when
they vested the whole of the executive power in the President.

464

Without declaration of war, President Lincoln took energetic action with the
outreak of the War Between the States. He summoned troops and pai d them out
of the Treasury without appropriation therefor. He proclaimed a naval blockade
of the Confederacy and seized ships violating that blockade. Congress, far
from denying the validity of these acts, gave them express approval. The most
striking action of President Lincoln was the Emancipation Proclamation, issued
in aid of the successful prosecution of the War Between the States, but wholly
without statutory authority.35

465

In an action furnishing a most apt precedent for this case, President Lincoln
without statutory authority directed the seizure of rail and telegraph lines
leading to Washington.36 Many months later, Congress recognized and confirmed
the power of the President to seize railroads and telegraph lines and provided
criminal penalties for interference with Government operation.37 This Act did
not confer on the President any additional powers of seizure. Congress plainly
rejected the view that the President's acts had been without legal sanction
until ratified by the legislature. Sponsors of the bill declared that its
purpose was only to confirm the power which the President already possessed.38
Opponents insisted a statute authorizing seizure was unnecessary and might
even be construed as limiting existing Presidential powers.39

466

Other seizures of private property occurred during the War Between the States,
just as they had occurred during previous wars.40 In United States v. Russell,
1872, 13 Wall. 623, 20 L.Ed. 624, three river steamers were seized by Army
Quartermasters on the ground of 'imperative military necessity.' This Court
affirmed an award of compensation, stating:

467

'Extraordinary and unforeseen occasions arise, however, beyond all doubt, in
cases of extreme necessity in time of war or of immediate and impending public
danger, in which private property may be impressed into the public service, or
may be seized and appropriated to the public use, or may even be destroyed
without the consent of the owner.'

468

'Exigencies of the kind do arise in time of war or impending public danger,
but it is the emergency, as was said by a great magistrate, that gives the
right, and it is clear that the emergency must be shown to exist before the
taking can be justified. Such a justification may be shown, and when shown the
rule is well settled that the officer taking private property for such a
purpose, if the emergency is fully proved, is not a trespasser, and that the
government is bound to make full compensation to the owner.'41

469

In Re Neagle, 1890, 135 U.S. 1, 10 S.Ct. 658, 4 L.Ed. 55, this Court held that
a federal officer had acted i n line of duty when he was guarding a Justice of
this Court riding circuit. It was conceded that there was no specific statute
authorizing the President to assign such a guard. In holding that such a
statute was not necessary, the Court broadly stated the question as follows:

470

'(The President) is enabled to fulfill the duty of his great department,
expressed in the phrase that 'he shall take care that the laws be faithfully
executed.'

471

'Is this duty limited to the enforcement of acts of Congress or of treaties of
the United States according to their express terms, or does it include the
rights, duties and obligations growing out of the Constitution itself, our
international relations, and all the protection implied by the nature of the
government under the Constitution?'42

472

The latter approach was emphatically adopted by the Court.

473

President Hayes authorized the widespread use of federal troops during the
Railroad Strike of 1877.43 President Cleveland also used the troops in the
Pullman Strike of 1895 and his action is of special significance. No statute
authorized this action. No call for help had issued from the Governor of
Illinois; indeed Governor Altgeld disclaimed the need for supplemental forces.
But the President's concern was that federal laws relating to the free flow of
interstate commerce and the mails be continuously and faithfully executed
without interruption.44 To further this aim his agents sought and obtained the
injunction upheld by this Court in In re Debs, 1895, 158 U.S. 564, 15 S.Ct.
900, 39 L.Ed. 1092. The Court scrutinized each of the steps taken by the
President to insure execution of the 'mass of legislation' dealing with
commerce and the mails and gave his conduct full approval. Congress likewise
took note of this use of Presidential power to forestall apparent obstacles to
the faithful execution of the laws. By separate resolutions, both the Senate
and the House commended the Executive's action.45

474

President Theodore Roosevelt seriously contemplated seizure of Pennsylvania
coal mines if a coal shortage necessitated such action.46 In his
autobiography, President Roosevelt expounded the 'Stewardship Theory' of
Presidential power, stating that 'the executive is subject only to the people,
and, under the Constitution, bound to serve the people affirmatively in cases
where the Constitution does not explicitly forbid him to render the
service.'47 Because the contemplated seizure of the coal mines was based on
this theory, then ex-President Taft criticized President Roosevelt in a
passage in his book relied upon by the District Court in this case. Taft, Our
Chief Magistrate and His Powers (1915), 139--147\. In the same book, however,
President Taft agreed that such powers of the President as the duty 'to take
care that the laws be faithfully executed' could not be confined to 'express
Congressional statutes.' In re Neagle, supra, and In re Debs, supra, were
cited as conforming with Taft's concept of the office, id., at pp. 88--94, as
they were later to be cited with approval in his opinion as Chief Justice in
Myers v. United States, 1926, 272 U.S. 52, 133, 47 S.Ct. 21, 31, 71 L.Ed.
160.48

475

In 1909, President Taft was informed that government owned oil lands were
being patented by private parties at such a rate tht public oil lands would be
depleted in a matter of months. Al though Congress had explicitly provided
that these lands were open to purchase by United States citizens, 29 Stat. 526
(1897), the President nevertheless ordered the lands withdrawn from sale '(i)n
aid of proposed legislation.' In United States v. Midwest Oil Co., 1915, 236
U.S. 459, 35 S.Ct. 309, 59 L.Ed. 673, the President's action was sustained as
consistent with executive practice throughout our history. An excellent brief
was filed in the case by the Solicitor General, Mr. John W. Davis, together
with Assistant Attorney General Knaebel, later Reporter for this Court. In
this brief, the situation confronting President Taft was described as 'an
emergency; there was no time to wait for the action of Congress.' The brief
then discusses the powers of the President under the Constitution in such a
case:

476

'Ours is a self-sufficient Government within its sphere. (Ex parte Siebold,
100 U.S. 371, 395 (25 L.Ed. 717); In re Debs, 158 U.S. 564, 578 (15 S.Ct. 900,
39 L.Ed. 1092).) 'Its means are adequate to its ends' (McCulloch v. (State of)
Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 424 (4 L.Ed. 579)), and it is rational to assume that
its active forces will be found equal in most things to the emergencies that
confront it. While perfect flexibility is not to be expected in a Government
of divided powers, and while division of power is one of the principal
features of the Constitution, it is the plain duty of those who are called
upon to draw the dividing lines to ascertain the essential, recognize the
practical, and avoid a slavish formalism which can only serve to ossify the
Government and reduce its efficiency without any compensating good. The
function of making laws is peculiar to Congress, and the Executive can not
exercise that function to any degree. But this is not to say that all of the
subjects concerning which laws might be made are perforce removed from the
possibility of Executive influence. The Executive may act upon things and upon
men in many relations which have not, though they might have, been actually
regulated by Congress. In other words, just as there are fields which are
peculiar to Congress and fields which are peculiar to the Executive, so there
are fields which are common to both, in the sense that the Executive may move
within them until they shall have been occupied by legislative action. These
are not the fields of legislative prerogative, but fields within which the
lawmaking power may enter and dominate whenever it chooses. This situation
results from the fact that the President is the active agent, not of Congress,
but of the Nation. As such he performs the duties which the Constitution lays
upon him immediately, and as such, also, he executes the laws and regulations
adopted by Congress. He is the agent of the people of the United States,
deriving all his powers from them and responsible directly to them. In no
sense is he the agent of Congress. He obeys and executes the laws of Congress,
not because Congress is enthroned in authority over him, but because the
Constitution directs him to do so.

477

'Therefore it follows that in ways short of making laws or disobeying them,
the Executive may be under a grave constitutional duty to act for the national
protection in situations not covered by the acts of Congress, and in which,
even, it may not be said that his action is the direct expression of any
particular one of the independent powers which are granted to him specifically
by the Constitution. Instances wherein the President has felt and fulfilled
such a duty have not been rare in our history, though, being for the public
benefit and approved by all, his acts have seldom been challenged in the
courts. We are able, however, to present a number of apposite cases which were
subjected to judicial inquiry.'

478

The brief then quotes from such cases as In re Debs, supra, and In re Neagle,
supra, and continues:

479

'As we understand the doctrine of the Neagle case, and the cases therein citd,
it is clearly this: The Executive is authorized to exert th e power of the
United States when he finds this necessary for the protection of the agencies,
the instrumentalities, or the property of the Government. This does not mean
an authority to disregard the wishes of Congress on the subject, when that
subject lies within its control and when those wishes have been expressed, and
it certainly does not involve the slightest semblance of a power to legislate,
much less to 'suspend' legislation already passed by Congress. It involves the
performance of specific acts, not of a legislative but purely of an executive
character--acts which are not in themselves laws, but which presuppose a 'law'
authorizing him to perform them. This law is not expressed, either in the
Constitution or in the enactments of Congress, but reason and necessity compel
that it be implied from the exigencies of the situation.

480

'In none of the cases which we have mentioned, nor in the cases cited in the
extracts taken from the Neagle case, was it possible to say that the action of
the President was directed, expressly or impliedly, by Congress. The
situations dealt with had never been covered by any act of Congress, and there
was no ground whatever for a contention that the possibility of their
occurrence had ever been specifically considered by the legislative mind. In
none of those cases did the action of the President amount merely to the
execution of some specific law.

481

'Neither does any of them stand apart in principle from the case at bar, as
involving the exercise of specific constitutional powers of the President in a
degree in which this case does not involve them. Taken collectively, the
provisions of the Constitution which designate the President as the official
who must represent us in foreign relations, in commanding the Army and Navy,
in keeping Congress informed of the state of the Union, in insuring the
faithful execution of the laws and in recommending new ones, considered in
connection with the sweeping declaration that the executive power shall be
vested in him, completely demonstrate that his is the watchful eye, the active
hand, the overseeing dynamic force of the United States.'49

482

This brief is valuable not alone because of the caliber of its authors but
because it lays bare in succinct reasoning the basis of the executive practice
which this Court approved in the Midwest Oil case.

483

During World War I, President Wilson established a War Labor Board without
awaiting specific direction by Congress.50 With William Howard Taft and Frank
P. Walsh as co-chairmen, the Board had as its purpose the prevention of
strikes and lockouts interfering with the production of goods needed to meet
the emergency. Effectiveness of War Labor Board decision was accomplished by
Presidental action, including seizure of industrial plants.51 Seizure of the
Nation's railroads was also ordered by President Wilson.52

484

Beginning with the Bank Holiday Proclamation53 and continuing through World
War II, executive leadership and intiative were characteristic of President
Franklin D. Roosevelt's administration. In 1939, upon the outbreak of war in
Europe, the President proclaimed a limited national emergency for the purpose
of strengthening our national defense.54 By May of 1941, the danger from the
Axis belligerents having become clear, the President proclaimed 'an unlimited
national emergency' calling for mobilization of the Nation's defenses to repel
aggression.55 The President took the initiative in strengthening our defenses
by acquiring rights from the British Government to establish air bases in
exchange for overage destroyers.56

485

In 1941, President Roosevelt acted to protect Iceland from attack by Axis
powers when British forces were withdrawn by sending our forces to occupy
Iceland. Congress was informed of this action on the same day that our forces
reached Iceland.57 The occupation of Iceland was but one of 'at least 125
incidents' in our history in which Presidents, 'without Congressinal
authorization, and in the absence of a declaration of war, (have) ordered the
Armed Forces to take action or maintain positions abroad.'58

486

Some six months before Pearl Harbor, a dispute at a single aviation plant at
Inglewood, California, interrupted a segment of the production of military
aircraft. In spite of the comparative insignificance of this work stoppage to
total defense production as contrasted with the complete paralysis now
threatened by a shutdown of the entire basic steel industry, and even though
our armed forces were not then engaged in combat, President Roosevelt ordered
the seizure of the plant 'pursuant to the powers vested in (him) by the
Constitution and laws of the United States, as President of the United States
of America and Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United
States.'59 The Attorney General (Jackson) vigorously proclaimed that the
President had the moral duty to keep this Nation's defense effort a 'going
concern.' His ringing moral justification was coupled with a legal
justification equally well stated:

487

'The Presidential proclamation rests upon the aggregate of the Presidential
powers derived from the Constitution itself and from statutes enacted by the
Congress.

488

'The Constitution lays upon the President the duty 'to take care that the laws
be faithfully executed.' Among the laws which he is required to find means to
execute are those which direct him to equip an enlarged army, to provide for a
strengthened navy, to protect Government property, to protect those who are
engaged in carrying out the business of the Government, and to carry out the
provisions of the Lend-Lease Act (22 U.S.C.A. ยง 411 et seq.). For the faithful
execution of such laws the President has back of him not only each general
law-enforcement power conferred by the various acts of Congress but the
aggregate of all such laws plus that wide discretion as to method vested in
him by the Constitution for the purpose of executing the laws.

489

'The Constititution als places on the President the responsibility and vests
in him t he powers of Commander in Chief of the Army and of the Navy. These
weapons for the protection of the continued existence of the Nation are placed
in his sole command and the implication is clear that he should not allow them
to become paralyzed by failure to obtain supplies for which Congress has
appropriated the money and which it has directed the President to obtain.'60

490

At this time, Senator Connally proposed amending the Selective Service and
Training Act to authorize the President to seize any plant where an
interruption of production would unduly impede the defense effort.61
Proponents of the measure in no way implied that the legislation would add to
the powers already possessed by the President62 and the amendment was opposed
as unnecessary since the President already had the power.63 The amendment
relating to plant seizures was not approved at that session of Congress.64

491

Meanwhile, and also prior to Pearl Harbor, the President ordered the seizure
of a shipbuilding company and an aircraft parts plant.65 Following the
declaration of war, but prior to the Smith-Connally Act of 1943, five
additional industrial concerns were seized to avert interruption of needed
production.66 During the same period, the President directed seizure of the
Nation's coal mines to remove an obstruction to the effective prosecution of
the war.67

492

The procedures adopted by President Roosevelt closely resembled the methods
employed by President Wilson. A National War Labor Board, like its predecessor
of World War I, was created by Executive Order to deal effectively and fairly
with disputes affecting defense production.68 Seizures were considered
necessary, upon disobedience of War Labor Board orders, to assure that the
mobilization effort remained a 'going concern,' and to enforce the economic
stabilization program.

493

At the time of the seizure of the coal mines, Senator Connally's bill to
provide a statutory basis for seizures and for the War Labor Board was again
before Congress. As stated by its sponsor, the purpose of the bill was not to
augment Presidential power, but to 'let the country know that the Congress is
squarely behind the President.'69 As in the case of the legislative
recognition of President Lincoln's power to seize, Congress again recognized
that the President already had the necessary power, for there was no intention
to 'ratify' past actions of doubtful validity. Indeed, when Senator Tydings
offered an amendment to the Connally bill expressly to confirm and validate
the seizure of the coal mines, sponsors of the bill opposed the amendment as
casting doubt on the legality of the seizure and the amendmentwas defeated.70
When the Connally bill, S. 796, came befo re the House, all parts after the
enacting clause were stricken and a bill introduced by Representative Smith of
Virginia was substituted and passed. This action in the House is significant
because the Smith bill did not contain the provisions authorizing seizure by
the President but did contain provisions controlling and regulating activities
in respect to properties seized by the Government under statute 'or
otherwise.'71 After a conference, the seizure provisions of the Connally bill,
enacted as the Smith-Connally or War Labor Disputes Act of 1943, 57 Stat. 163,
were agreed to by the House.

494

Following passage of the Smith-Connally Act, seizures to assure continued
production on the basis of terms recommended by the War Labor Board were based
upon that Act as well as upon the President's power under the Constitution and
the laws generally. A question did arise as to whether the statutory language
relating to 'any plant, mine, or facility equipped for the manufacture,
production, or mining of any articles or materials'72 authorized the seizure
of properties of Montgomery Ward & Co., a retail department store and mail
order concern. The Attorney General (Biddle) issued an opinion that the
President possessed the power to seize Montgomery Ward properties to prevent a
work stoppage whether or not the terms of the Smith-Connally Act authorized
such a seizure.73 This opinion was in line with the views on Presidential
powers maintained by the Attorney General's predecessors (Murphy74 and
Jackson75) and his successor (Clark76). Accordingly, the President ordered
seizure of the Chicago properties of Montgomery Ward in April, 1944, when that
company refused to obey a War Labor Board order concerning the bargaining
represenative of its employees in Chicago.77 In Congress, a Select Commitee to
Investigate Seizure of the Property of Montgomery Ward & Co., assuming that
the terms of the Smith-Connally Act did not cover this seizure, concluded that
the seizure 'was not only within the Constitutional power but was the plain
duty of the President.'78 Thereafter, an election determined the bargaining
representative for the Chicago employees and the properties were returned to
Montgomery Ward & Co. In December, 1944, after continued defiance of a series
of War Labor Board orders, President Roosevelt ordered the seizure of
Montgomery Ward properties throughout the country.79 The Court of Appeals for
the Seventh Circuit upheld this seizure on statutory grounds and also
indicated its disapproval of a lower court's denial of seizure power apart
from express statute.80

495

More recently,President Truman acted to repel aggression by employing our ar
med forces in Korea.81 Upon the intervention of the Chinese Communists, the
President proclaimed the existence of an unlimited national emergency
requiring the speedy build-up of our defense establishment.82 Congress
responded by providing for increased manpower and weapons for our own armed
forces, by increasing military aid under the Mutual Security Program and by
enacting economic stabilization measures, as previously described.

496

This is but a cursory summary of executive leadership. But it amply
demonstrates that Presidents have taken prompt action to enforce the laws and
protect the country whether or not Congress happened to provide in advance for
the particular method of execution. At the minimum, the executive actions
reviewed herein sustain the action of the President in this case. And many of
the cited examples of Presidential practice go far beyond the extent of power
necessary to sustain the President's order to seize the steel mills. The fact
that temporary executive seizures of industrial plants to meet an emergency
have not been directly tested in this Court furnishes not the slightest
suggestion that such actions have been illegal. Rather, the fact that Congress
and the courts have consistently recognized and given their support to such
executive action indicates that such a power of seizure has been accepted
throughout our history.

497

History bears out the genius of the Founding Fathers, who created a Government
subject to law but not left subject to inertia when vigor and initiative are
required.

IV.

498

Focusing now on the situation confronting the President on the night of April
8, 1952, we cannot but conclude that the President was performing his duty
under the Constitution to 'take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed'--a
duty described by President Benjamin Harrison as 'the central idea of the
office.'83

499

The President reported to Congress the morning after the seizure that he acted
because a work stoppage in steel production would immediately imperil the
safety of the Nation by preventing execution of the legislative programs for
procurement of military equipment. And, while a shutdown could be averted by
granting the price concessions requested by plaintiffs, granting such
concessions would disrupt the price stabilization program also enacted by
Congress. Rather than fail to execute either legislative program, the
President acted to execute both.

500

Much of the argument in this case has been directed at straw men. We do not
now have before us the case of a President acting solely on the basis of his
own notions of the public welfare. Nor is there any question of unlimited
executive power in this case. The President himself closed the door to any
such claim when he sent his Message to Congress stating his purpose to abide
by any action of Congress, whether approving or disapproving his seizure
action. Here, the President immediately made sure that Congress was fully
informed of the temporary action he had taken only to preserve the legislative
programs from destruction until Congress could act.

501

The absence of a specific statute authorizing seizure of the steel mills as a
mode of executing the laws--both the military procurement program and the
anti-inflation program--has not until today been thought to prevent the
President from executing the laws. Unlike an administrative commission
confined to the enforcement of the statute under which it was created, or the
head to a department when administering a particular statute, the President is
a constitutional officer charged with taking care that a 'mass of legislation'
be executed. Flexibility as to mode of execution to meet critical situations
is a matter of practical necessity. This practical construction of the 'Take
Care' clause, adocated by John Marshall, was adopted by this Court in In re
Neagle, In re Debs and other cases cited supra. See also Ex parte Quirin,
1942, 317 U.S. 1, 26, 63 S.Ct. 2, 10, 87 L.Ed. 3. Although more restrictive
views of executive power, advocated in dissenting opinions of Justices Holmes,
McReynolds and Brandeis, were emphatically rejected by this Court in Myers v.
United States, supra, members of today's majority treat these dissenting views
as authoritative.

502

There is no statute prohibiting seizure as a method of enforcing legislative
programs. Congress has in no wise indicated that its legislation is not to be
executed by the taking of private property (subject of course to the payment
of just compensation) if its legislation cannot otherwise be executed. Indeed,
the Universal Military Training and Service Act authorizes the seizure of any
plant that fails to fill a Government contract84 or the properties of any
steel producer that fails to allocate steel as directed for defense
production.85 And the Defense Production Act authorizes the President to
requisition equipment and condemn real property needed without delay in the
defense effort.86 Where Congress authorizes seizure in instances not
necessarily crucial to the defense program, it can hardly be said to have
disclosed an intention to prohibit seizures where essential to the execution
of that legislative program.

503

Whatever the extent of Presidential power on more tranquil occasions, and
whatever the right of the President to execute legislative programs as he sees
fit without reporting the mode of execution to Congress, the single
Presidential purpose disclosed on this record is to faithfully execute the
laws by acting in an emergency to maintain the status quo, thereby preventing
collapse of the legislative programs until Congress could act. The President's
action served the same purposes as a judicial stay entered to maintain the
status quo in order to preserve the jurisdiction of a court. In his Message to
Congress immediately following the seizure, the President explained the
necessity of his action in executing the military procurement and anti-
inflation legislative programs and expressed his desire to cooperate with any
legislative proposals approving, regulating or rejecting the seizure of the
steel mills. Consequently, there is no evidence whatever of any Presidential
purpose to defy Congress or act in any way inconsistent with the legislative
will.

504

In United States v. Midwest Oil Co., supra, this Court approved executive
action where, as here, the President acted to preserve an important matter
until Congress could act--even though his action in that case was contrary to
an express statute. In this case, there is no statute prohibiting the action
taken by the President in a matter not merely important but threatening the
very safety of the Nation. Executive inaction in such a situation, courting
national disaster, is foreign to the concept of energy and initiative in the
Executive as created by the Founding Fathers. The Constitution was itself
'adopted in a period of grave emergency. * * * While emergency does not create
power, emergency may furnish the occasion for the exercise of power.'87 The
Framers knew, as we should know in these times of peril, that there is real
danger in Executive weakness. There is no cause to fear Executive tyranny so
long as the laws of Congress are being faithfully executed. Certainly there is
no basis for fear of dictatorship when the Executive acts, as he did in this
case, only to save the situation until Congress could act.

505

Plaintiffs place their primary emphasis on the Labor M anagement Relations Act
of 1947, hereinafter referred to as the Taft-Hartley Act, but do not contend
that that Act contains any provision prohibiting seizure.

506

Under the Taft-Hartley Act, as under the Wagner Act, collective bargaining and
the right to strike are at the heart of our national labor policy. Taft-
Hartley preserves the right to strike in any emergency, however serious,
subject only to an 80-day delay in cases of strikes imperiling the national
health and safety.88 In such a case, the President may appoint a board of
inquiry to report the facts of the labor dispute. Upon receiving that report,
the President may direct the Attorney General to petition a District Court to
enjoin the strike. If the injunction is granted, it may continue in effect for
no more than 80 days, during which time the board of inquiry makes further
report and efforts are made to settle the dispute. When the injunction is
dissolved, the President is directed to submit a report to Congress together
with his recommendations.89

507

Enacted after World War II, Taft-Hartley restricts the right to strike against
private employers only to a limited extent and for the sole purpose of
affording an additional period of time within which to settle the dispute.
Taft-Hartley in no way curbs strikes before an injunction can be obtained and
after an 80-day injunction is dissolved.

508

Plaintiffs admit that the emergency procedures of Taft-Hartley are not
mandatory. Nevertheless, plaintiffs apparently argue that, since Congress did
provide the 80-day injunction method for dealing with emergency strikes, the
President cannot claim that an emergency exists until the procedures of Taft-
Hartley have been exhausted. This argument was not the basis of the District
Court's opinion and, whatever merit the argument might have had following the
enactment of Taft-Hartley, it loses all force when viewed in light of the
statutory pattern confronting the President in this case.

509

In Title V of the Defense Production Act of 1950,90 Congress stated:

510

'It is the intent of Congress, in order to provide for effective price and
wage stabilization pursuant to title IV of this Act and to maintain
uninterrupted production, that there be effective procedures for the
settlement of labor disputes affecting national defense.' ยง 501.

511

Title V authorized the President to initiate labor-management conferences and
to take action appropriate to carrying out the recommendations of such
conferences and the provisions of Title V. ยง 502\. Due regard is to be given
to collective bargaining practice and stabilization policies and no action
taken is to be inconsistent with Taft-Hartley and other laws. ยง 503\. The
purpose of these provisions was to authorize the President 'to establish a
board, commission or other agency, similar to the War Labor Board of World War
II, to carry out the title.'91

512

The President authorized the Wage Stabilization Board (WSB), which administers
the wage stabilization functions of Title IV of the Defense Production Act,
also to deal with labor disputes affecting the defense program.92 When
extension of the Defense Production Act was before Congress in 1951, the
Chairman of the Wage Stabilization Board described in detail the relationship
between the Taft-Hartley procedures applicable to labor disputes imperiling
the national health and safety and the new WSB dispute procedures especially
devised for settlement of labor disputes growing out of the needs of the
defense prgram.93 Aware that a technique separate from Taft-Hartley had been
devised, members of Congress attempted to divest the WSB of its disputes
powers. These attempts were defeated in the House, were not brought to a vote
in the Senate and the Defense Production Act was extended through June 30,
1952, without change in the disputes powers of the WSB.94 Certainly this
legislative creation of a new procedure for dealing with defense disputes
negatives any notion that Congress intended the earlier and discretionary
Taft-Hartley procedure to be an exclusive procedure.

513

Accordingly, as of December 22, 1951, the President had a choice between
alternate procedures for settling the threatened strike in the steel mills:
one route created to deal with peacetime disputes; the other route specially
created to deal with disputes growing out of the defense and stabilization
program. There is no question of by-passing a statutory procedure because both
of the routes available to the President in December were based upon statutory
authorization. Both routes were available in the steel dispute. The Union, by
refusing to abide by the defense and stabilization program, could have forced
the President to invoke Taft-Hartley at that time to delay the strike a
maximum of 80 days. Instead, the Union agreed to cooperate with the defense
program and submit the dispute to the Wage Stabilization Board.

514

Plaintiffs had no objection whatever at that time to the President's choice of
the WSB route. As a result, the strike was postponed, a WSB panel held
hearings and reported the position of the parties and the WSB recommended the
terms of a settlement which it found were fair and equitable. Moreover, the
WSB performed a function which the board of inquiry contemplated by Taft-
Hartley could not have accomplished when it checked the recommended wage
settlement against its own wage stabilization regulations issued pursuant to
its stabilization functions under Title IV of the Defense Production Act.
Thereafter, the parties bargained on the basis of the WSB recommendation.

515

When the President acted on April 8, he had exhausted the procedures for
settlement available to him. Taft-Hartley was a route parallel to, not
connected with, the WSB procedure. The strike had been delayed 99 days as
contrasted with the maximum delay of 80 days under Taft-Hartley. There had
been a hearing on the issues in dispute and bargaining which promised
settlement up to the very hour before seizure had broken down. Faced with
immediate national peril through stoppage in steel production on the one hand
and faced with destruction of the wage and price legislative programs on the
other, the President took temporary possession of the steel mills as the only
course open to him consistent with his duty to take care that the laws be
faithfully executed.

516

Plaintiffs' property was taken and placed in the possession of the Secretary
of Commerce to prevent any interruption in steel production. It made no
difference whether the stoppage was caused by a union-management dispute over
terms and conditions of employmnt, a union-Government dispute over wage
stabilization or a management-Government dispute over price stabilization. The
President's action has thus far been effective, not in settling the dispute,
but in saving the various legislative programs at stake from destruction until
Congress could act in the matter.

VI.

517

The diversity of views expressed in the six opinions of the majority, the lack
of reference to authoritative precedent, the repeated reliance upon prior
dissenting opinions, the complete disregard of the uncontroverted facts
showing the gravity of the emergency and the temporary nature of the taking
all serve to demonstrate how far afield one must go to affirm the order of the
District Court.

518

The broad executive power granted by Article II to an officer on duty 365 days
a year cannot, it is said, be invoked to avert disaster. Instead, the
President must confine himself to sending a message to Congress recommending
action. Under this messenger-boy concept of the Office, the President cannot
even act to preserve legislative programs from destruction so that Congress
will have something left to act upon. There is no judicial finding that the
executive action was unwarranted because there was in fact no basis for the
President's finding of the existence of an emergency95 for, under this view,
the gravity of the emergency and the immediacy of the threatened disaster are
considered irrelevant as a matter of law.

519

Seizure of plaintiffs' property is not a pleasant undertaking. Similarly
unpleasant to a free country are the draft which disrupts the home and
military procurement which causes economic dislocation and compels adoption of
price controls, wage stabilization and allocation of materials. The President
informed Congress that even a temporary Government operation of plaintiffs'
properties was 'thoroughly distasteful' to him, but was necessary to prevent
immediate paralysis of the mobilization program. Presidents have been in the
past, and any man worthy of the Office should be in the future, free to take
at least interim action necessary to execute legislative programs essential to
survival of the Nation. A sturdy judiciary should not be swayed by the
unpleasantness or unpopularity of necessary executive action, but must
independently determine for itself whether the President was acting, as
required by the Constitution, to 'take Care that the Laws be faithfully
executed.'

520

As the District Judge stated, this is no time for 'timorous' judicial action.
But neither is this a time for timorous executive action. Faced with the duty
of executing the defense programs which Congress had enacted and the
disastrous effects that any stoppage in steel production would have on those
programs, the President acted to preserve those programs by seizing the steel
mills. There is no question that the possession was other than temporary in
character and subject to congressional direction--either approving,
disapproving or regulating the manner in which the mills were to be
administered and returned to the owners. The President immediately informed
Congress of his action and clearly stated his intention to abide by the
legislative will. No basis for claims of arbitrary action, unlimited powers or
dictatorial usurpation of congressional power appears from the facts of this
case. On the contrary, judicial, legislative and executive precedents
throughout our history demonstrate that in this case the President acted in
full conformity with his duties under the Constitution. Accordingly, we would
reverse the order of the District Court.

1

This Board was established under Executive Order 10233, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง
2071 note, 16 Fed.Reg. 3503, U.S.Code Cong. Service 1951, p. 1018.

2

The Selective Service Act of 1948, 62 Stat. 604, 625--627, 50 U.S.C.App.
(Supp. IV) ยง 468, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 468; the Defense Production Act of
1950, Tit. II, 64 Stat. 798, as amended, 65 Stat. 132, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง
2081.

3

93 Cong.Rec. 3637--3645.

4

93 Cong.Rec. 3835--3836.

5

Labor Management Relations Act, 1947, 61 Stat. 136, 152 156, 29 U.S.C. (Supp.
IV) ยงยง 141, 171--180, 29 U.S.C.A. ยงยง 141, 171 180.

1

The power to seize plants under the War Labor Disputes Act ended with the
termination of hostilities, proclaimed on Dec. 31, 1946, prior to the incoming
of the Eightieth Congress; and the power to operate previously seized plants
ended on June 30, 1947, only a week after the enactment of the Labor
Management Relations Act over the President's veto. 57 Stat. 163, 165, 50
U.S.C.App. (1946 ed.) ยง 1503, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 1503\. See 2 Legislative
History of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947 (published by National
Labor Relations Board, 1948), 1145, 1519, 1626.

2

Some of the more directly relevant statements are the following: 'In most
instances the force of public opinion should make itself sufficiently felt in
this 80-day period to bring about a peaceful termination of the controversy.
Should this expectation fail, the bill provides for the President laying the
matter before Congress for whatever legislation seems necessary to preserve
the health and safety of the Nation in the crisis.' Senate Report No. 105,
80th Cong., 1st Sess. 15.

'We believe it would be most unwise for the Congress to attempt to adopt laws
relating to any single dispute between private parties.' Senate Minority
Report, id., Part 2, at 17.

In the debates Senator H. Alexander Smith, a member of the Senate Committee on
Labor and Public Welfare, said, 'In the event of a deadlock and a strike is
not ended, the matter is referred to the President, who can use his discretion
as to whether he will present the matter to the Congress, whether or not the
situation is such that emergency legislation is required.

'Nothing has been done with respect to the Smith-Connally Act. There is no
provision for taking over property or running plants by the Government. We
simply provide a procedure which we hope will be effective in 99 out of 100
cases where the health or safety of the people may be affected, and still
leave a loophole for congressional action.' 93 Cong.Rec. 4281.

The President in his veto message said, '* * * it would be mandatory for the
President to transfer the whole problem to the Congress, even if it were not
in session. Thus, major economic disputes between employers and their workers
over contract terms might ultimately be thrown into the political arena for
disposition. One could scarcely devise a less effective method for
discouraging critical strikes.' 93 Cong.Rec. 7487.

3

Senator Taft said:

'If there finally develops a complete national emergency threatening the
safety and health of the people of the United States, Congress can pass an
emergency law to cover the particular emergency. * * *

'We have felt that perhaps in the case of a general strike, or in the case of
other serious strikes after the termination of every possible effort to
resolve the dispute, the remedy might be an emergency act by Congress for that
particular purpose.

'* * * But while such a bill (For seizure of plants and union funds) might be
prepared, I should be unwilling to place such a law on the books until we
actually face such an emergency, and Congress applies the remedy for the
particular emergency only. Eighty days will provide plenty of time within
which to consider the possibility of what should be done; and we believe very
strongly that there should not be anything in this law which prohibits finally
the right to strike.' 93 Cong.Rec. 3835--3836.

4

93 Cong. Rec. 3637--3645.

5

See, for instance, the statements of James B. Carey, Secretary of the C.I.O.,
in opposition to S. 2054, 77th Cong., 1st Sess., which eventually became the
War Labor Disputes Act. Central to that Act, of course, was the temporary
grant of the seizure power to the President. Mr. Carey then said:

'Senator Burton. If this would continue forever it might mean the
nationalization of industry?

'Mr. Carey. Let us consider it on a temporary basis. How is the law borne by
labor? Here is the Government-sponsored strike breaking agency, and nothing
more.

'Our suggestion of a voluntary agreement of the representatives of industry
and labor and Government, participating in calling a conference, is a
democratic way. The other one is the imposition of force, the other is the
imposition of seizure of certain things for a temporary period; the
destruction of collective bargaining, and it would break down labor relations
that may have been built up over a long period.'

Hearing before a Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary on S.
2054, 77th Cong. 1st Sess. 132.

6

Clearly the President's message of April 9 and his further letter to the
President of the Senate on April 21 do not satisfy this requirement.
Cong.Rec., April 9, 1952, pp. 3962--3963; id., April 21, 1952, p. 4192.

7

64 Stat. 798 et seq., 65 Stat. 131 et seq., 50 U.S.C.App. ยง 2061 et seq., 50
U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 2061 et seq.

8

ยงยง 501, 502, 64 Stat. 798, 812, 50 U.S.C.App. ยงยง 2121, 2122, 50
U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยงยง 2121, 2122.

9

ยงยง 502, 503, 64 Stat. 798, 812, 50 U.S.C.App. ยงยง 2122, 2123, 50
U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยงยง 2122, 2123.

10

The provision of ยง 502 in S. 3936, as reported by the Senate Committee on
Banking and Currency, read as follows: 'The President is authorized, after
consultation with labor and management, to establish such principles and
procedures and to take such action as he deems appropriate for the settlement
of labor disputes affecting national defense, including the designation of
such persons, boards or commissions as he may deem appropriate to carry out
the provisions of this title.' That language was superseded in the Conference
Report by the language that was finally enacted. H.R.Rep. No. 3042, 81st
Cong., 2d Sess. 16, 35. The change made by the Conference Committee was for
the purpose of emphasizing the voluntary nature of the cooperation sought from
the public, labor, and management; as Senator Ives explained under repeated
questioning, 'If any group were to hold out, there would be no agreement (on
action to carry out the provisions of this title).' 96 Cong.Rec. 14071--
14072\. Chairman Maybank of the Senate Committee on Banking and Currency said,
'The labor disputes title of the Senate was accepted by the House with
amendment which merely indicates more specific avenues through which the
President may bring labor and management together.' Id., at 14073.

11

S.Rep. No. 2250, 81st Cong., 2d Sess. 41; H.R.Rep. No. 3042, 81st Cong., 2d
Sess. 35. It is hardly necessary to note that Congressional authorization of
an agency similar to the War Labor Board does not imply a Congressional grant
of seizure power similar to that given the President specifically by ยง 3 of
the War Labor Disputes Act of 1943. The War Labor Board, created by ยง 7 of the
1943 Act, had only administrative sanctions. See 57 Stat. 163, 166--167; see
Report of Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, The Disputes Functions
of the Wage Stabilization Board, 1951, S.Rep. No. 1037, 82d Cong., 1st Sess.
6. The seizure power given by Congress in ยง 3 of the 1943 Act was given to the
President, not to the War Labor Board, and was needed only when the War Labor
Board reported it had failed; the seizure power was separate and apart from
the War Labor Board machinery for settling disputes. At most the Defense
Production Act does what ยง 7 of the War Labor Disputes Act did; the omission
of any grant of seizure power similar to ยง 3 is too obvious not to have been
conscious. At any rate, the Wage Stabilization Board differs substantially
from the earlier War Labor Board. In 1951 the Senate Committee studying the
disputes functions of the Wage Stabilization Board pointed out the substantial
differences between that Board and its predecessor and concluded that 'The New
Wage Stabilization Board * * * does not rely on title V of the Defense
Production Act for its authority.' S.Rep.No. 1037, 82d Cong., 1st Sess.,
supra, at 4--6.

12

S.Rep. No. 2250, 81st Cong., 2d Sess. 41.

13

See 96 Cong.Rec. 14071.

14

Id., at 12275. Just before the paragraph quoted in the text, Senator Ives had
said:

'In fact, the courts have upheld the constitutionality of the national
emergency provisions of the Labor-Management Relations Act of 1947, which can
require that workers stay on the job for at least 80 days when a strike would
seriously threaten the national health and safety in peacetime.

'By the terms of the pending bill, the Labor-Management Relations Act of 1947
would be controlling in matters affecting the relationship between labor and
management, including collective bargaining. It seems to me, however, that
this is as far as we should go in legislation of this type.'

15

16 Fed.Reg. 3503. The disputes functions were not given to the Wage
Stabilization Board under Title V, see note 11, supra, but apparently under
the more general Title IV, entitled 'Price and Wage Stabilization.'

16

See Hearings before a Subcommittee of the House Committee on Education and
Labor, Disputes Functions of Wage Stabilization Board, 82d Cong., 1st Sess.
(May 28--June 15, 1951); Hearings before the Subcommittee on Labor and Labor-
Management Relations of Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, Wage
Stabilization and Disputes Program, 82d Cong., 1st Sess. (May 17--June 7,
1951). The resulting Report of the Senate Committee, S.Rep. No. 1037, 82d
Cong., 1st Sess. 9, recommended that 'Title V of the Defense Production Act be
retained' and that 'No statutory limitations be imposed on the President's
authority to deal with disputes through voluntary machinery; such limitations,
we believe, would infringe on the President's constitutional power.' (Emphasis
added.) The Committee found, id., at 10, that the 'Wage Stabilization Board
relies completely on voluntary means for settling disputes and is, therefore,
an extension of free collective bargaining. The Board has no powers of legal
compulsion.' 'Executive Order No. 10233,' the Committee found further, 'does
not in any way run counter to the * * * Taft-Hartley Act. It is simply an
additional tool, not a substitute for these laws.' Of particular relevance to
the present case, the Committee declared:

'The recommendations of the Wage Stabilization Board in disputes certified by
the President have no compulsive force. The parties are free to disregard
recommendations of the Wage Stabilization Board * * *.

'There is, of course, the President's authority to seize plants under the
Selective Service Act (a power not here used), but this is an authority which
exists independently of the Wage Stabilization Board and its disputes-handling
functions. In any case, seizure is an extraordinary remedy, and the authority
to seize, operates whether or not there is a disputes-handling machinery.'
Id., at 5.

17

97 Cong.Rec. 8390--8415.

18

65 Stat. 131.

19

Instances of seizure by the President are summarized in Appendix II, infra.

20

One of President Wilson's seizures has given rise to controversy. In his
testimony in justification of the Montgomery Ward seizure during World War II,
Attorney General Biddle argued that the World War I seizure of Smith & Wesson
could not be supported under any of the World War I statutes authorizing
seizure. He thus adduced it in support of the claim of so-called inherent
presidential power of seizure. See Hearings before House Select Committee to
Investigate the Seizure of Montgomery Ward, 78th Cong., 2d Sess. 167--168\. In
so doing, he followed the ardor of advocates in claiming everything. In his
own opinion to the President, he rested the power to seize Montgomery Ward on
the statutory authority of the War Labor Disputes Act, see 40 Ops. Att'y Gen.
312 (1944), and the Court of Appeals decision upholding the Montgomery Ward
seizure confined itself to that ground. United States v. Montgomery Ward &
Co., 7 Cir., 150 F.2d 369. What Attorney General Biddle said about Smith &
Wesson was, of course, post litem motam. Whether or not the World War I
statutes were broad enough to justify that seizure, it is clear that the
taking officers conceived themselves as moving within the scope of statute
law. See n. 3, Appendix II, infra. Thus, whether or not that seizure was
within the statute, it cannot properly be cited as a precedent for the one
before us. On this general subject, compare Attorney General Knox's opinion
advising President Theodore Roosevelt against the so-called 'stewardship'
theory of the Presidency. National Archives, Opinions of the Attorney General,
Book 31, Oct. 10, 1902 (R.G. 60); Theodore Roosevelt, Autobiography, 388--389;
3 Morison, The Letters of Theodore Roosevelt, 323--366.

*

Governmental possession of the Nation's railroads taken on December 28, 1917,
was specifically terminated by statute on March 1, 1920, prior to the end of
the "war." See ยง 200 of the Transportation Act of 1920, 41 Stat. 456, 457.

1

What a President may do as a matter of expediency or extremity may never reach
a definitive consitutional decision. For example, President Lincoln suspended
the writ of habeas corpus, claiming the constitutional right to do so. See Ex
part Merryman, 17 Fed.Cas.No.9,487. Congress ratified his action by the Act of
March 3, 1863. 12 Stat. 755.

2

Mr. Justice Brandeis, speaking for the Court in United States v. North
American Transportation & Trading Co., 253 U.S. 330, 333, 40 S.Ct. 518, 520,
64 L.Ed. 935, stated that the basis of the Government's liability for a taking
of property was legislative authority, 'In order that the Government shall be
liable to must appear that the officer who has physically taken possession of
the property was duly authorized so to do, either directly by Congress or by
the official upon whom Congress conferred the power.'

That theory explains cases like United States v. Causby, 328 U.S. 256, 66
S.Ct. 1062, 90 L.Ed. 1206, where the acts of the officials resulting in a
taking were acts authorized by the Congress, though the Congress had not
treated the acts us one of appropriation of private property.

War-time seizures by the military in connection with military operations, cf.
United States v. Russell, 13 Wall. 623, 20 L.Ed. 474, are also in a different
category.

1

A Hamilton may be matched againt a Madison. 7 The Works of Alexander Hamilton,
76--117; 1 Madison, Letters and Other Writings, 611--654\. Professor Taft is
counterbalanced by Theodore Roosevelt. Taft, Our Chief Magistrate and His
Powers, 139--140; Theodore Roosevelt, Autobiography, 388--389\. It even seems
that President Taft cancels out Professor Taft. Compare his 'Temporary
Petroleum Withdrawal No. 5' of September 27, 1909, United States v. Midwest
Oil Co., 236 U.S. 459, 467, 468, 35 S.Ct. 309, 311, 59 L.Ed. 673, with his
appraisal of executive power in 'Our Chief Magistrate and His Powers' 139--
140.

2

It is in this class of cases that we find the broadest recent statements of
presidential power, including those relied on here. United States v. Curtiss-
Wright Export Corp., 299 U.S. 304, 57 S.Ct. 216, 221, 81 L.Ed. 255, involved,
not the question of the President's power to act without congressional au-

thority, but the question of his right to act under and in accord with an Act
of Congress. The constitutionality of the Act under which the President had
proceeded was assailed on the ground that it delegated legislative powers to
the President. Much of the Court's opinion is dictum, but the ratio decidendi
is contained in the following language:

'When the President is to be authorized by legislation to act in respect of a
matter intended to affect a situation in foreign territory, the legislator
properly bears in mind the important consideration that the form of the
President's action--or, indeed, whether he shall act at all--may well depend,
among other things, upon the nature of the confidential information which he
has or may thereafter receive, or upon the effect which his action may have
upon our foreign relations. This consideration, in connection with what we
have already said on the subject, discloses the unwisdom of requiring Congress
in this field of governmental power to lay down narrowly definite standards by
which the President is to be governed. As this court said in Mackenzie v.
Hare, 239 U.S. 299, 311, 36 S.Ct. 106, 108, 60 L.Ed. 297, 'As a government,
the United States is invested with all the attributes of sovereignty. As it
has the character of nationality it has the powers of nationality, especially
those which concern its relations and intercourse with other countries. We
should hesitate long before limiting or embarrasing such powers.' (Italics
supplied.)'

That case does not solve the present controversy. It recognized internal and
external affairs as being in separate categories, and held that the strict
limitation upon congressional delegations of power to the President over
internal affairs does not apply with respect to delegations of power in
external affairs. It was intimated that the President might act in external
affairs without congressional authority, but not that he might act contrary to
an Act of Congress.

Other examples of wide definition of presidential powers under statutory
authorization are Chicago & Southern Air Lines v. Waterman Steamship Corp.,
333 U.S. 103, 68 S.Ct. 431, 92 L.Ed. 568, and Hirabayashi v. United States,
320 U.S. 81, 63 S.Ct. 1375, 87 L.Ed. 1774. But see, Jecker v. Montgomery, 13
How. 498, 515, 14 L.Ed. 240; Western Union Telegraph Co. v. United States,
D.C., 272 F. 311, affirmed, 2 Cir., 272 F. 893, reversed on consent of the
parties, 260 U.S. 754, 43 S.Ct. 91, 67 L.Ed. 497; United States Harness Co. v.
Graham, D.C., 288 F. 929.

3

Since the Constitution implies that the writ of habeas corpus may be suspended
in certain circumstances but does not say by whom, President Lincoln asserted
and maintained it as an executive function in the face of judicial challenge
and doubt. Ex parte Merryman, 17 Fed.Cas. 144, No. 9,487; Ex parte Milligan, 4
Wall. 2, 125, 18 L.Ed. 281; see Ex parte Bollman, 4 Cranch, 75, 101, 2 L.Ed.
554. Congress eventually ratified his action. Habeas Corpus Act of March 3,
1863, 12 Stat. 755. See Hall, Free Speech in War Time, 21 Col.L.Rev. 526.
Compare Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52, 47 S.Ct. 21, 71 L.Ed. 160, with
Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 295 U.S. 602, 55 S.Ct. 869, 79 L.Ed.
1611, and Hirabayashi v. United States, 320 U.S. 81, 63 S.Ct. 1375, 87 L.Ed.
1774, with the case at bar. Also compare Ex parte Vallandigham, 1 Wall. 243,
17 L.Ed. 589, with Ex parte Milligan, supra.

4

President Roosevelt's effort to remove a Federal Trade Commissioner was found
to be contrary to the policy of Congress and impinging upon an area of
congressional control, and so his removal power was cut down accordingly.
Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 295 U.S. 602, 55 S.Ct. 869, 79 L.Ed.
1611. However, his exclusive power of removal in executive agencies, affirmed
in Myers v. United States, 272 U.S. 52, 47 S.Ct. 21, 71 L.Ed. 160, continued
to be asserted and maintained. Morgan v. Tennessee Valley Authority, 6 Cir.,
115 F.2d 990, certiorari denied 312 U.S. 701, 61 S.Ct. 806, 85 L.Ed. 1135; In
re Power to Remove Members of the Tennessee Valley Authority, 39 O.A.G. 145;
President Roosevelt's Message to Congress of March 23, 1938, The Public Papers
and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt, 1938 (Rosenman), 151.

5

The oft-cited Louisiana Purchase had nothing to do with the separation of
powers as between the President and Congress, but only with state and federal
power. The Louisiana Purchase was subject to rather academic criticism, not
upon the ground that Mr. Jefferson acted without authority from Congress, but
that neither had express authority to expand the boundaries of the United
States by purchase or annexation. Mr. Jefferson himself had strongly opposed
the doctrine that the State's delegation of powers to the Federal Government
could be enlarged by resort to implied powers. Afterwards in a letter to John
Breckenridge, dated August 12, 1803, he declared:

'The Constitution has made no provision for our holding foreign territory,
still less for incorporating foreign nations into our Union. The executive in
seizing the fugitive occurrence which so much advances the good of their
country, have done an act beyond the Constitution. The Legislature is casting
behind them metaphysical subtleties, and risking themselves like faithful
servants, must ratify and pay for it, and throw themselves on their country
for doing for them unauthorized, what we know they would have done for
themselves had they been in a situation to do it.' 10 The Writings of Thomas
Jefferson 407.

6

Selective Service Act of 1948, ยง 18, 62 Stat. 625, 50 U.S.C.App. (Supp. IV) ยง
468(c), 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 468(c).

7

Defense Production Act of 1950, ยง 201, 64 Stat. 799, amended, 65 Stat. 132, 50
U.S.C.App. (Supp. IV) ยง 2081, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 2081\. For the latitude
of the condemnation power which underlies this Act, see United States v.
Westinghouse Elec. & Mfg. Co., 339 U.S. 261, 70 S.Ct. 644, 94 L.Ed. 816, and
cases therein cited.

8

Labor Management Relations Act, 1947, ยงยง 1, 206--210, 61 Stat. 136, 155, 156,
29 U.S.C. (Supp. IV) ยงยง 141, 176--180, 29 U.S.C.A. ยงยง 141, 176--180\. The
analysis, history and application of this Act are fully covered by the opinion
of the Court, supplemented by that of Mr. Justice FRANKFURTER and of Mr.
Justice BURTON, in which I concur.

9

'* * * he may require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in
each of the executive Departments, upon any Subject relating to the Duties of
their respective Offices * * *.' U.S.Const. Art. II, ยง 2\. He '* * * shall
Commission all the Officers of the United States.' U.S.Const. Art. II, ยง 3\.
Matters such as those would seem to be inherent in the Executive if anything
is.

10

How widely this doctrine espoused by the President's counsel departs from the
early view of presidential power is shown by a comparison. President
Jefferson, without authority from Congress, sent the American Fleet into the
Mediterranean, where it engaged in a naval battle with the Tripolitan fleet.
He sent a message to Congress on December 8, 1801, in which he said:

'Tripoli, the least considerable of the Barbary States, had come forward with
demands unfounded either in right or in compact, and had permitted itself to
denounce war on our failure to comply before a given day. The style of the
demand admitted but one answer. I sent a small squadron of frigates into the
Mediterranean * * * with orders to protect our commerce against the threatened
attack. * * * Our commerce in the Mediterranean was blockaded, and that of the
Atlantic in peril. * * * One of the Tripolitan cruisers having fallen in with,
and engaged the small schooner Enterprise, * * * was captured, after a heavy
slaughter of her men * * *. Unauthorized by the constitution, without the
sanction of Congress, to go beyond the line of defence, the vessel being
disabled from committing further hostilities, was liberated with its crew. The
legislature will doubltless consider whether, by authorizing measures of
offence, also, they will place our force on an equal footing with that of its
adversaries. I communicate all material information on this subject, that in
the exercise of the important function confided by the constitution to the
legislature exclusively, their judgment may form itself on a knowledge and
consideration of every circumstance of weight.' I Richardson, Messages and
Papers of the Presidents, 314.

11

U.S.Const., Art. I, ยง 8, cl. 15.

12

14 Stat. 29, 16 Stat. 143, 8 U.S.C. ยง 55, 8 U.S.C.A. ยง 55.

13

20 Stat. 152, 10 U.S.C. ยง 15, 10 U.S.C.A. ยง 15.

14

In 1940, President Roosevelt proposed to transfer to Great Britain certain
overage destroyers and small patrol boats then under construction. He did not
presume to rely upon any claim of constitutional power as Commander-in-Chief.
On the contrary, he was advised that such destroyers--if certified not to be
essential to the defense of the United States--could be 'transferred,
exchanged, sold, or otherwise disposed of,' because Congress had so authorized
him. Accordingly, the destroyers were exchanged for air bases. In the same
opinion, he was advised that Congress had prohibited the release or transfer
of the so-called 'mosquito boats' then under construction, so those boats were
not transferred. In the Matter of Acquisition of Naval and Air Bases in
Exchange for Overage Destroyers, 39 O.A.G. 484. See also Matter of Training
British Flying Students in the United States, 40 O.A.G. 58.

15

U.S.Const. Art. II, ยง 3.

16

President Wilson, just before our entrance into World War I, went before the
Congress and asked its approval of his decision to authorize merchant ships to
carry defensive weapons. He said:

'No doubt I already possess that authority without special warrant of law, by
the plain implication of my constitutional duties and powers; but I prefer in
the present circumstances not to act upon general implication. I wish to feel
that the authority and the power of the Congress are behind me in whatever it
may become necessary for me to do. We are jointly the servants of the people
and must act together and in their spirit, so far as we can divine and
interpret it.' XVII Richardson, op.cit., 8211.

When our Government was itself in need of shipping whilst ships flying the
flags of nations overrun by Hitler, as well as belligerent merchantmen, were
immobilized in American harbors where they had taken refuge, President
Roosevelt did not assume that it was in his power to seize such foreign
vessels to make up our own deficit. He informed Congress: 'I am satisfied,
after consultation with the heads of the interested departments and agencies,

that we should have statutory authority to take over such vessels as our needs
require. * * *' 87 Cong.Rec. 3072 (77th Cong., 1st Sess.); The Public Papers
and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt, 1941 (Rosenman), 94. The necessary
statutory authority was shortly forthcoming. 55 Stat. 242.

In his first inaugural address President Roosevelt pointed out two courses to
obtain legislative remedies, one being to enact measures he was prepared to
recommend, the other to enact measures 'the Congress may build out of its
experience and wisdom.' He continued, 'But in the event that the Congress
shall fail to take and of these two courses, and in the event that the
national emergency is still critical, I shall not evade the clear course of
duty that will then confront me. I shall ask the Congress for the one
remaining instrument to meet the crisis--broad Executive power to wage a war
against the emergency, as great as the power that would be given to me if we
were in fact invaded by a foreign foe.' (Emphasis supplied.) The Public Papers
and Adresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt, 1933 (Rosenman), 15.

On March 6, 1933, 48 Stat. 1689, President Roosevelt proclaimed the Bank
Holiday. The Proclamation did not invoke constitutional powers of the
Executive but expressly and solely relied upon the Act of Congress of October
6, 1917, 40 Stat. 411, ยง 5(b), as amended, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 5(b). He
relied steadily on legislation to empower him to deal with economic emergency.
The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt, 1933 (Rosenman), 24.

It is interesting to note Holdsworth's comment on the powers of legislation by
proclamation when in the hands of the Tudors. 'The extent to which they could
be legally used was never finally settled in this century, because the Tudors
made so tactful a use of their powers that no demand for the settlement of
this question was raised.' 4 Holdsworth, History of English Law, 104.

17

The North American Aviation Company was under direct and binding contracts to
supply defense items to the Government. No such contracts are claimed to exist
here. Seizure of plants which refused to comply with Government orders had
been expressly authorized by Congress in ยง 9 of the Selective Service Act of
1940, 54 Stat. 885, 892, so that the seizure of the North American plant was
entirely consistent with congressional policy. The company might have objected
on technical grounds to the seizure, but it was taken over with acquiescence,
amounting to all but consent, of the owners who had admitted that the
situation was beyond their control. The strike involved in the North American
case was in violation of the union's collective agreement and the national
labor leaders approved the seizure to end the strike. It was described as in
the nature of an insurrection, a Communist-led political strike against the
Government's lend-lease policy. Here we have only a loyal, lawful, but
regrettable economic disagreement between management and labor. The North
American plant contained government-owned machinery, material and goods in the
process of production to which workmen were forcibly denied access by
picketing strikers. Here no Government property is protected by the seizure.
See New York Times of June 10, 1941, pp. 1, 14 and 16, for substantially
accurate account of the proceedings and the conditions of violence at the
North American plant.

The North American seizure was regarded as an execution of congressional
policy. I do not regard it as a precedent for this, but, even if I did, I
should not bind present judicial judgment by earlier partisan advocacy.

Statements from a letter by the Attorney General to the Chairman of the Senate
Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, dated February 2, 1949, with reference
to pending labor legislation, while not cited by any of the parties here are
sometimes quoted as being in support of the 'inherent' powers of the
President. The proposed bill contained a mandatory provision that during
certain investigations the disputants in a labor dispute should continue
operations under the terms and conditions of employment existing prior to the
beginning of the dispute. It made no provision as to how continuance should be
enforced and specified no penalty for disobedience. The Attorney General
advised that in appropriate circumstances the United States would have access
to the courts to protect the national health, safety and welfare. This was the
rule laid down by this Court in Texas & N.O.R. Co. v. Brotherhood of Steamship
Clerks, 281 U.S. 548, 50 S.Ct. 427, 74 L.Ed. 1034. The Attorney General
observed:

'However, with regard to the question of the power of the Government under
Title III, I might point out that the inherent power of the President to deal
with emergencies that affect the health, safety and welfare of the entire
Nation is exceedingly great. See Opinion of Attorney General Murphy of October
4, 1939, 39 Op.A.G. 344, 347; United States v. United Mine Workers of America,
1947, 330 U.S. 258, 67 S.Ct. 677, 91 L.Ed. 884.'

'Regardless of the general reference to 'inherent powers,' the citations were
instances of congressional authorization. I do not suppose it is open to doubt
that power to see that the laws are faithfully executed was ample basis for
the specific advice given by the Attorney General in this letter.

18

U.S.Const. Art. I, ยง 9, cl. 2.

19

I exclude, as in a very limited category by itself, the establishment of
martial law. Cf. Ex parte Milligan, 4 Wall. 2, 18 L.Ed. 281; Duncan v.
Kahanamoku, 327 U.S. 304, 66 S.Ct. 606, 90 L.Ed. 688.

20

I Nazi Conspiracy and Aggression 126--127; Rossiter, Constitutional
Dictatorship, 33--61; Brecht, Prelude to Silence, 138.

21

Rossiter, Constitutional Dictatorship, 117--129.

22

Defense of the Realm Act, 1914, 4 & 5, Geo. V. c. 29, as amended, c. 63;
Emergency Powers (Defence) Act, 1939, 2 & 3 Geo. VI, c. 62; Rossiter,
Constitutional Dictatorship, 135--184.

23

Churchill, The Unrelenting Struggle, 13. See also id., at 279--281.

24

39 Op.Atty.Gen. 348.

25

Wilson, Constitutional Government in the United States, 68--69.

26

Rossiter, The Supreme Court and the Commander in Chief, 126--132.

27

We follow the judicial tradition instituted on a memorable Sunday in 1612,
when King James took offense at the independence of his judges and, in rage,
declared: 'Then I am to be under the law--which it is treason to affirm.'
Chief Justice Coke replied to his King: 'Thus wrote Bracton, 'The King ought
not to be under any man, but he is under God and the law." 12 Coke 63 (as to
its verity, 18 Eng.Hist.Rev. 664--675); 1 Campbell, Lives of the Chief
Justices, 272.

1

'Article I

'Section. 1. All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a
Congress of the United States * * *.

'Section. 8. The Congress shall have Power * * *;

'To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States * *
*;

'To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into
Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this
Constitution in the Government of the United States, or in any Department or
Officer thereof.'

2

61 Stat. 155, 29 U.S.C. (Supp. IV) ยง 176, 29 U.S.C.A. ยง 176.

3

61 Stat. 155--156, 29 U.S.C. (Supp. IV) ยงยง 176--180, 29 U.S.C.A. ยงยง 176--180.

4

The Chairman of the Senate Committee sponsoring the bill said in the Senate:

'We did not feel that we should put into the law, as a part of the
collectivebargaining machinery, an ultimate resort to compulsory arbitration,
or to seizure, or to any other action. We feel that it would interfere with
the whole process of collective bargaining. If such a remedy is available as a
routine remedy, there will always be pressure to resort to it by whichever
party thinks it will receive better treatment through such a process than it
would receive in collective bargaining, and it will back out of collective
bargaining. It will not make a bona-fide attempt to settle if it thinks it
will receive a better deal under the final arbitration which may be provided.

'We have felt that perhaps in the case of a general strike, or in the case of
other serious strikes, after the termination of every possible effort to
resolve the dispute, the remedy might be an emergency act by Congress for that
particular purpose.

'I have had in mind drafting such a bill, giving power to seize the plants,
and other necessary facilities, to seize the unions, their money, and their
treasury, and requisition trucks and other equipment; in fact, to do
everything that the British did in their general strike of 1926. But while
such a bill might be prepared, I should be unwilling to place such a law on
the books until we actually face such an emergency, and Congress applies the
remedy for the particular emergency only. Eighty days will provide plenty of
time within which to consider the possibility of what should be done; and we
believe very strongly that there should not be anything in this law which
prohibits finally the right to strike.' 93 Cong.Rec. 3835--3836.

Part of this quotation was relied upon by this Court in Amalgamated
Association of Street Railway & Motor Coach Employees v. Wisconsin Employment
Relations Board, 340 U.S. 383, 396, note 21, 71 S.Ct. 359, 366, 95 L.Ed. 364.

5

Under Titles IV and V of the Defense Production Act of 1950, 64 Stat. 803--
812, 50 U.S.C.App. (Supp. IV) ยงยง 2101--2123, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยงยง 2101--
2123; and see Exec. Order No. 10233, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 2071 note, 16
Fed.Reg. 3503.

6

Congress has authorized other types of seizure under conditions not present
here. Section 201 of the Defense Production Act authorizes the President to
acquire specific 'real property, including facilities, temporary use thereof,
or other interest therein * * *' by condemnation. 64 Stat. 799, as amended, 65
Stat. 132, see 50 U.S.C.App. (Supp. IV) ยง 2081, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 2081\.
There have been no declarations of taking or condemnation proceedings in
relation to any of the properties involved here. Section 18 of the Selective
Service Act of 1948 authorizes the President to take possession of a plant or
other facility failing to fill certain defense orders placed with it in the
manner there prescribed. 62 Stat. 625, 50 U.S.C.App. (Supp. IV) ยง 468, 50
U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 468\. No orders have been so placed with the steel plants
seized.

7

The President and Congress have recognized the termination of the major
hostilities in the total wars in which the Nation has been engaged. Many
wartime procedures have expired or been terminated.

The War Labor Disputes Act, 57 Stat. 163 et seq., 50 U.S.C.App. ยงยง 1501--1511,
50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยงยง 1501--1511, expired June 30, 1947, six months after
the President's declaration of the end of hostilities, 3 CFR, 1946 Supp., p.
77. The Japanese Peace Treaty was approved by the Senate March 20, 1952, 98
Cong.Rec. 2635, and proclaimed by the President April 28, 1952, No. 2974, 17
Fed.Reg. 3813.

1

1804, 2 Cranch 170, 2 L.Ed. 243.

2

2 Cranch at pages 177--178, 2 L.Ed. 243 (emphasis added).

3

Decisions of this Court which have upheld the exercise of presidential power
include the following: Prize Cases (The Amy Warwick), 1863, 2 Black 635, 17
L.Ed. 459, (subsequent ratification of President's acts by Congrss); In re
Neagle, 1890, 135 U.S. 1, 10 S.Ct. 658, 34 L.Ed. 55, (protection of federal
officials from personal violence while performing official duties); In re
Debs, 1895, 158 U.S. 564, 15 S.Ct. 900, 39 L.Ed. 1092 (injunction to prevent
forcible obstruction of interstate commerce and the mails); United States v.
Midwest Oil Co., 1915, 236 U.S. 459, 35 S.Ct. 309, 59 L.Ed. 673 (acquiescence
by Congress in more than 250 instances of exercise of same power by various
Presidents over period of 80 years); Myers v. United States, 1926, 272 U.S.
52, 47 S.Ct. 21, 71 L.Ed. 160 (control over subordinate officials in executive
department) (but see Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 1935, 295 U.S. 602,
626--628, 55 S.Ct. 869, 873, 874, 79 L.Ed. 1611); Hirabayashi v. United
States, 1943, 320 U.S. 81, 63 S.Ct. 1375, 87 L.Ed. 1774, and Korematsu v.
United States, 1944, 323 U.S. 214, 65 S.Ct. 193, 89 L.Ed. 194 (express
congressional authorization); cf. United States v. Russell, 1871, 13 Wall.
623, 20 L.Ed. 474 (imperative military necessity in area of combat during
war); United States v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corp., 1936, 299 U.S 304, 57
S.Ct. 216, 81 L.Ed. 255 (power to negotiate with foreign governments); United
States v. United Mine Workers, 1947, 330 U.S. 258, 67 S.Ct. 677, 91 L.Ed. 884
(seizure under specific statutory authorization).

4

Chief Justice Marshall, in McCulloch v. Maryland, 1819, 4 Wheat. 316, 415, 4
L.Ed. 579.

5

Letter of April 4, 1864, to A. G. Hodges, in 10 Complete Works of Abraham
Lincoln (Nicolay and Hay ed. 1894), 66.

6

Roosevelt, Autobiography (1914 ed.), 371--372.

7

Letter of April 4, 1864, to A. G. Hodges, in 10 Complete Words of Abraham
Lincoln (Nicolay and Hay ed. 1894), 66.

8

61 Stat. 155, 29 U.S.C. (Supp. IV) ยง 176, 29 U.S.C.A. ยง 176.

9

93 Cong.Rec. 3637--3645; cf. id., at 3835--3836.

10

61 Stat. 156, 29 U.S.C. (Supp. IV) ยง 180, 29 U.S.C.A. ยง 180.

11

E.g., S.Rep.No.105, 80th Cong., 1st Sess. 15; 93 Cong.Rec. 3835--3836; id., at
4281.

12

The producer must have been notified that the order was placed pursuant to the
Act. The Act provides in pertinent part as follows:

'(a) Whenever the President after consultation with and receiving advice from
the National Security Resources Board determines that it is in the interest of
the national security for the Government to obtain prompt delivery of any
articles or materials the procurement of which has been authorized by the
Congress exclusively for the use of the armed forces of the United States, or
for the use of the Atomic Energy Commission, he is authorized, through the
head of any Government agency, to place with any person operating a plant,
mine, or other facility capable of producing such articles or materials an
order for such quantity of such articles or materials as the President deems
appropriate. Any person with whom an order is placed pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be advised that such order is placed pursuant
to the provisions of this section.

'(c) In case any person with whom an order is placed pursuant to the
provisions of subsection (a) refuses or fails--

'(2) to fill such order within the period of time prescribed by the President
or as soon thereafter as possible as determined by the President;

'(3) to produce the kind or quality of articles or materials ordered; or

'(4) to furnish the quantity, kind, and quality of articles or materials
ordered at such price as shall be negotiated between such person and the
Government agency concerned; or in the event of failure to negotiate a price,
to furnish the quantity, kind, and quality of articles or materials ordered at
such price as he may subsequently be determined to be entitled to receive
under subsection (d); the President is authorized to take immediate possession
of any plant, mine, or other facility of such person and to operate it,
through any Government agency, for the production of such articles or
materials as may be required by the Government.' 62 Stat. 625, 50 U.S.C.App.
(Supp. IV) ยง 468, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 468\. The Act was amended in 1951 and
redesignated the Universal Military Training and Service Act, but no change
was made in this section. 65 Stat. 75.

13

39 Stat. 213, 50 U.S.C.A. ยง 80; 54 Stat. 892.

14

The Government has offered no explanation, in the record, the briefs, or the
oral argument, as to why it could not have made both a literal and timely
compliance with the provisions of that Act. Apparently the Government could
have placed orders with the steel companies for the various types of steel
needed for defense purposes, and instructed the steel companies to ship the
mate riel directly to producers of planes, tanks, and munitions. The Act does
not require that government orders cover the entire capacity of a producer's
plant before the President has power to seize.

Our experience during World War I demonstrates the speed with which the
Government can invoke the remedy of seizing plants which fail to fill
compulsory orders. The Federal Enameling & Stamping Co., of McKees Rocks, Pa.,
was served with a compulsory order on September 13, 1918, and seized on the
same day. The Smith & Wesson plant at Springfield, Mass., was seized on
September 13, 1918, after the company had failed to make deliveries under a
compulsory order issued the preceding week. Communication from Ordnance Office
to War Department Board of Appraisers, entitled 'Report on Plants Commandeered
by the Ordnance Office,' Dec. 19, 1918, pp. 3, 4, in National Archives,
Records of the War Department, Office of the Chief of Ordnance, O.O.
004.002/260. Apparently the Mosler Safe Co., of Hamilton, Ohio, was seized on
the same day on which a compulsory order was issued. Id., at 2; Letter from
counsel for Mosler Safe Co. to Major General George W. Goethals, Director of
Purchase, Storage and Traffic, War Department, Dec. 9, 1918, p. 1, in National
Archives, Records of the War Department, Office of the General Staff, PST
Division 400.1202.

15

The Orono, C.C.D.Mass.1812, 18 Fed.Cas.No.10,585.

1

59 Stat. 1031, 1037 (1945); 91 Cong.Rec. 8190 (1945).

2

U.N. Security Council, U.N. Doc. S/1501 (1950); Statement by the President,
June 25, 1950, United States Policy in the Korean Crisis, Dept. of State Pub.
(1950), 16.

3

U.N. General Assembly, U.N. Doc. A/1771 (1951).

4

61 Stat. 103 (1947), 22 U.S.C.A. ยง 1401 et seq.

5

62 Stat. 137 (1948), as amended, 63 Stat. 50 (1949), 64 Stat. 198 (1950), 22
U.S.C.A. ยง 1501 et seq.

6

63 Stat. 2241 (1949), extended to Greece and Turkey, S. Exec. E, 82d Cong., 2d
Sess. (1952), advice and consent of the Senate granted. 98 Cong.Rec. 930.

7

63 Stat. 714 (1949), 22 U.S.C.A. ยง 1571 et seq.

8

S. Execs. A, B, C and D, 82d Cong., 2d Sess. (1952), advice and consent of the
Senate granted. 98 Cong.Rec. 2594, 2595, 2605.

9

65 Stat. 373 (1951), 22 U.S.C.A. ยง 1651.

10

65 Stat. 730 (1951); see H.R.Doc. No. 147, 82d Cong., 1st Sess. 3 (1951).

11

See H.R.Doc. 382, 82d Cong., 2d Sess. (1952).

12

Hearings before Senate Committee on Foreign Relations on the Mutual Security
Act of 1952, 82d Cong., 2d Sess. 565--566 (1952); Hearings before House
Committee on Foreign Affairs on the Mutual Security Act of 1952, 82d Cong., 2d
Sess. 370 (1952).

13

65 Stat. 75 (1951); S.Rep. No. 117, 82d Cong., 1st Sess. 3 (1951).

14

Address by Secretary of Defense Lovett Before the American Society of
Newspaper Editors, Washington, April 18, 1952.

15

Fiscal Year 1952, 65 Stat. 423, 760 (1951); F.Y. 1951, 64 Stat. 595, 1044,
1223, 65 Stat. 48, (1950--1951); F.Y. 1950, 63 Stat. 869, 973, 987 (1949);
F.Y. 1949, 62 Stat. 647 (1948); F.Y. 1948, 61 Stat. 551 (1947).

16

See H.R.Rep. No. 1685, 82d Cong., 2d Sess. 2 (1952), on H.R. 7391.

17

See H.R.Rep. No. 384, 82d Cong., 1st Sess. 5 (1951); 97 Cong.Rec. 13647--
13649.

18

Defense Production Act, Tit. III, 64 Stat. 798 (1950), 65 Stat. 138 (1951), 50
U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 2091 et seq.

19

Note 18, supra, Tits. IV and V, 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยงยง 2101 et seq., 2121 et
seq.

20

S.Rep. No. 470, 82d Cong., 1st Sess. 8 (1951).

21

Id., at 8--9.

22

Exec.Order 10340, 17 Fed.Reg. 3139 (1952).

23

Cong.Rec., April 9, 1952, pp. 3962--3963.

24

Cong.Rec., April 21, 1952, p. 4192.

25

Chicago & Southern Air Lines v. Waterman S.S. Corp., 1948, 333 U.S. 103, 111,
68 S.Ct. 431, 436, 92 L.Ed. 568, and cases cited.

26

The Federalist, No. XLVIII.

27

The Federalist, No. LXX.

28

McCulloch v. State of Maryland, 1819, 4 Wheat. 316, 415, 424, 4 L.Ed. 579.

29

United States v. Classic, 1941, 313 U.S. 299, 315--316, 1037--1038, 61 S.Ct.
1031, 85 L.Ed. 1368; Home Building & Loan Ass'n v. Blaisdell, 1934, 290 U.S.
398, 442--443, 241--242, 54 S.Ct. 231, 78 L.Ed. 413.

30

4 Annals of Congress 1411, 1413 (1794).

31

IV Works of Hamilton (Lodge ed. 1904) 432--444.

32

10 Annals of Congress 596, 613--614 (1800); also printed in 5 Wheat.App. pp.
3, 27 (1820).

33

10 Annals of Congress 619 (1800).

34

Fong Yue Ting v. United States, 1893, 149 U.S. 698, 714, 13 S.Ct. 1016, 1022,
37 L.Ed. 905.

35

See The Prize Cases (the Amy Warwick), 1863, 2 Black 635, 17 L.Ed. 459;
Randall, Constitutional Problems Under Lincoln (1926); Corwin, The President:
Office and Powers (1948 ed.), 277 281.

36

War of the Rebellion, Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies,
Series I, Vol. II, pp. 603--604 (1880).

37

12 Stat. 334 (1862).

38

Senator Wade, Cong. Globe, 37th Cong., 2d Sess. 509 (1862); Rep. Blair, id.,
at 548.

39

Senators Browning, Fessenden, Cowan, Grimes, id., at 510, 512, 516, 520.

40

In 1818, the House Committee on Military Affairs recommended payment of
compensation for vessels seized by the Army during the War of 1812. American
State Papers, Claims (1834), 649. Mitchell v. Harmony, 1852, 13 How. 115, 134,
14 L.Ed. 75, involving seizure of a wagon train by an Army officer during the
Mexican War, noted that such executive seizure was proper in case of
emergency, but affirmed a personal judgment against the officer on the ground
that no emergency had been found to exist. The judgment was paid by the United
States pursuant to Act of Congress. 10 Stat. 727 (1852).

41

13 Wall. at pages 627--628\. Such a compensable taking was soon distinguished
from the noncompensable taking and destruction of property during the extreme
exigencies of a military campaign. United States v. Pacific R. Co., 1887, 120
U.S. 227, 7 S.Ct. 490, 30 L.Ed. 634.

42

135 U.S. at page 64, 10 S.Ct. at page 668.

43

Rich, The President and Civil Disorders (1941), 72--86.

44

Cleveland, The Government in the Chicago Strike of 1894 (1913).

45

26 Cong.Rec. 7281--7284, 7544--7546 (1894).

46

Theodore Roosevelt, Autobiography (1916 ed.), 479--491.

47

Id., at 378.

48

Humphrey's Executor v. United States, 1935, 295 U.S. 602, 626, 55 S.Ct. 869,
873, 79 L.Ed. 1611, disapproved expressions in the Myers opinion only to the
extent that they related to the President's power to remove members of quasi-
legislative and judicial commissions as constrasted with executive employees.

49

Brief for the United States, No. 278, October Term, 1914, pp. 11, 75--77, 88--
90.

50

National War Labor Board. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Bull. 287 (1921).

51

Id., at 24--25, 32--34\. See also, 2 Official U.S. Bull. (1918) No. 412; 8
Baker, Woodrow Wilson, Life & Letters (1939), 400--402; Berman, Labor Disputes
and the President (1924), 125--153; Pringle, The Life and Times of William
Howard Taft (1939), 915 925.

52

39 Stat. 619, 645 (1916), 10 U.S.C.A. ยง 1361, provides that the President may
take possession of any system of transportation in time of war. Following
seizure of the railroads by President Wilson, Congress enacted detailed
legislation regulating the mode of federal control. 40 Stat. 451 (1918).

When Congress was considering the statute authorizing the President to seize
communications systems whenever he deemed such action necessary during the
war, 40 Stat. 904 (1918), 47 U.S.C.A. ยง 63 note, Senator (later President)
Harding opposed on the ground that there was no need for such stand-by powers
because, in event of a presen necessity, the Chief Excutive 'ought to' seize
communications lines, 'else he would be unfaithful to his duties as such Chief
Executive.' 56 Cong.Rec. 9064 (1918).

53

48 Stat. 1689 (1933).

54

54 Stat. 2643 (1939).

55

55 Stat. 1647 (1941).

56

86 Cong.Rec. 11354 (1940) (Message of the President). See 39 Ops.Atty.Gen. 484
(1940). Attorney General Jackson's opinion did not extend to the transfer of
'Mosquito boats' solely because an express statutory prohibition on transfer
was applicable.

57

87 Cong.Rec. 5868 (1941) (Message of the President).

58

Powers of the President to Send the Armed Forces Outside the United States,
Report prepared by executive department for use of joint committee of Senate
Committees on Foreign Relations and Armed Services, 82d Cong., 1st Sess.,
Committee Print 2 (1951).

59

Exec. Order 8773, 6 Fed.Reg. 2777 (1941).

60

See 89 Cong.Rec. 3992 (1943). The Attorney General also noted that the dispute
at North American Aviation was Communist inspired and more nearly resembled an
insurrection than a labor strike. The relative size of North American Aviation
and the impact of an interruption in production upon our defense effort were
not described.

61

87 Cong.Rec. 4932 (1941). See also S. 1600 and S. 2054, 77th Cong., 1st Sess.
(1941).

62

Reps. May, Whittington; 87 Cong.Rec. 5895, 5972 (1941).

63

Reps. Dworshak, Feddis, Harter, Dirksen, Hook; 87 Cong.Rec. 5901, 5910, 5974,
5975 (1941).

64

The plant seizure amendment passed the Senate, but was rejected in the House
after a Conference Committee adopted the amendment. 87 Cong.Rec. 6424 (1941).

65

Exec. Order 8868, 6 Fed.Reg. 4349 (1941); Exec. Order 8928, 6 Fed.Reg. 5559
(1941).

66

Exec. Order 9141, 7 Fed.Reg. 2961 (1942); Exec. Order 9220, 7 Fed.Reg. 6413
(1942); Exec. Order 9225, 7 Fed.Reg. 6627 (1942); Exec. Order 9254, 7 Fed.Reg.
8333 (1942); Exec. Order 9351, 8 Fed.Reg. 8097 (1943).

67

Exec. Order 9340, 8 Fed.Reg. 5695 (1943).

68

Exec. Order 9017, 7 Fed.Reg. 237 (1942); 1 Termination Report of the National
War Labor Board 5--11.

69

89 Cong.Rec. 3807 (1943). Similar views of the President's existing power were
expressed by Senators Lucas, Wheeler, Austin and Barkley. Id., at 3885--3887,
3896, 3992.

70

89 Cong.Rec. 3989--3992 (1943).

71

S. 796, 78th Cong., 1st Sess., ยงยง 12, 13 (1943), as passed by the House.

72

57 Stat. 163, 164 (1943).

73

40 Ops.Atty.Gen. 312 (1944). See also Hearings before House Select Committee
to Investigate Seizure of Montgomery Ward & Co., 78th Cong., 2d Sess. 117--132
(1944).

74

39 Ops.Atty.Gen. 343, 347 (1939).

75

Note 60, supra.

76

Letter introduced in Hearings before Senate Committee on Labor and Public
Welfare on S. 249, 81st Cong., 1st Sess. 232 (1949) pointing to the
'exceedingly great' powers of the President to deal with emergencies even
before the Korea crisis.

77

Exec. Order 9438, 9 Fed.Reg. 4459 (1944).

78

H.R.Rep. No. 1904, 78th Cong., 2d Sess. 25 (1944) (the Committee divided along
party lines).

79

Exec. Order 9508, 9 Fed.Reg. 15079 (1944).

80

United States v. Montgomery Ward & Co., 7 Cir., 1945, 150 F.2d 369, reversing
D.C.N.D.Ill.1945, 58 F.Supp. 408. See also Ken-Rad Tube & Lamp Corp. v.
Badeau, D.C.W.D.Ky.1944, 55 F.Supp. 193, 197--199, where the court held that a
seizure was proper with or without express statutory authorization.

81

United States Policy in the Korean Crisis (1950), Dept. of State Pub. 3922.

82

15 Fed.Reg. 9029 (1950).

83

Harrison, This Country of Ours (1897), 98.

84

62 Stat. 604, 626 (1948), 50 U.S.C.App. (Supp. IV) ยง 468(c), 50
U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 468(c).

85

62 Stat. 604, 627 (1948), 50 U.S.C.App. (Supp. IV) ยง 468(h)(1), 50
U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 468(h)(1).

86

Tit. II, 64 Stat. 798 (1950), as amended 65 Stat. 138 (1951), 50
U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 2081.

87

Home Building & Loan Ass'n v. Blaisdell, 1934, 290 U.S. 398, 425--426, 54
S.Ct. 231, 235, 78 L.Ed. 413.

88

See Amalgamated Ass'n of Street, Electric Railway & Motor Coach Employees v.
Wisconsin Board, 1951, 340 U.S. 383, 71 S.Ct. 359, 95 L.Ed. 364.

89

ยงยง 206--210, Labor Management Relations Act of 1947. 29 U.S.C. (Supp. IV) ยงยง
176--180, 29 U.S.C.A. ยงยง 176--180.

90

64 Stat. 812, 65 Stat. 132 (1950, 1951).

91

H.R.Rep. No. 3042, 81st Cong., 2d Sess. 35 (1950) (Conference Report). See
also S.Rep. No. 2250, 81st Cong., 2d Sess. 41 (1950).

92

Exec. Order 10161, 15 Fed.Reg. 6105 (1950), as amended, Exec. Order 10233, 16
Fed.Reg. 3503 (1951), 50 U.S.C.A.Appendix, ยง 2071 note.

93

Hearings before the House Committee on Banking and Currency on Defense
Production Act Amendments of 1951, 82d Cong., 1st Sess. 305--306, 312--313
(1951).

94

The Lucas Amendment to abolish the disputes function of the WSB was debated at
length in the House, the sponsor of the amendment pointing out the similarity
of the WSB functions to those of the War Labor Board and noting the seizures
that occurred when War Labor Board orders were not obeyed. 97 Cong. 8390--
8415\. The amendment was rejected by a vote of 217 to 113. Id., at 8415. A
similar amendment introduced in the Senate was withdrawn. 97 Cong.Rec. 7373--
7374\. The Defense Production Act was extended without amending Tit. V or
otherwise affecting the disputes functions of the WSB. 65 Stat. 132 (1951).

95

Compare Sterling v. Constantin, 1932, 287 U.S. 378, 399 401, 53 S.Ct. 190, 195
--196, 77 L.Ed. 375.

