INS v. Chadha, 462 U.S. 919 (1983)


**Chief Justice BURGER delivered the opinion of the Court.**

[This case] presents a challenge to the constitutionality of the provision in § 244(c)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act authorizing one House of Congress, by
resolution, to invalidate the decision of the Executive Branch, pursuant to
authority delegated by Congress to the Attorney General of the United States,
to allow a particular deportable alien to remain in the United States.

Chadha is an East Indian who was born in Kenya and holds a British passport. He was lawfully admitted to the United States in 1966 on a nonimmigrant student visa. His visa expired on June 30, 1972. On October 11, 1973, the District Director of the Immigration and Naturalization Service ordered Chadha to show cause why he should not be deported for having "remained in the United States for a longer time than permitted." [A] deportation hearing was held before an immigration judge on January 11, 1974. Chadha conceded that he was deportable for overstaying his visa and the hearing was adjourned to enable him to file an application for suspension of deportation under § 244(a)(1) of the Act. Section 244(a)(1) provides:

> (a) As hereinafter prescribed in this section, the Attorney General may, in his discretion, suspend deportation and adjust the status to that of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence, in the case of an alien who applies to the Attorney General for suspension of deportation and--

> (1) is deportable under any law of the United States except the provisions specified in paragraph (2) of this subsection; has been physically present in the United States for a continuous period of not less than seven years immediately preceding the date of such application, and proves that during all of such period he was and is a person of good moral character; and is a person whose deportation would, in the opinion of the Attorney General, result in extreme hardship to the alien or to his spouse, parent, or child, who is a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence."

After Chadha submitted his application for suspension of deportation, the
deportation hearing was resumed on February 7, 1974. On the basis of evidence
adduced at the hearing, affidavits submitted with the application, and the
results of a character investigation conducted by the INS, the immigration
judge, on June 25, 1974, ordered that Chadha's deportation be suspended. The
immigration judge found that Chadha met the requirements of § 244(a)(1): he
had resided continuously in the United States for over seven years, was of
good moral character, and would suffer "extreme hardship" if deported.

Pursuant to § 244(c)(1) of the Act, the immigration
judge suspended Chadha's deportation and a report of the suspension was
transmitted to Congress. Once the Attorney General's recommendation for suspension of Chadha's deportation was conveyed to Congress, Congress had the power under § 244(c)(2)
of the Act to veto the Attorney General's
determination that Chadha should not be deported. Section 244(c)(2) provides:

> (2) In the case of an alien specified in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of
this subsection--

> if during the session of the Congress at which a case is reported, or prior to the close of the session of the Congress next following the session at which a case is reported, either the Senate or the House of Representatives passes a resolution stating in substance that it does not favor the suspension of such deportation, the Attorney General shall thereupon deport such alien or authorize the alien's voluntary departure at his own expense under the order of deportation in the manner provided by law. If, within the time above specified, neither the Senate nor the House of Representatives shall pass such a resolution, the Attorney General shall cancel deportation proceedings." 


> On December 12, 1975, Representative Eilberg, Chairman of the Judiciary
Subcommittee on Immigration, Citizenship, and International Law, introduced a
resolution opposing "the granting of permanent residence in the United States
to [six] aliens", including Chadha. The resolution was passed without debate or recorded vote. Since the House action was pursuant to § 244(c)(2), the resolution was not treated as an Article I legislative act; it was not submitted to the Senate or presented to
the President for his action.

After the House veto of the Attorney General's decision to allow Chadha to
remain in the United States, the immigration judge reopened the deportation
proceedings to implement the House order deporting Chadha. Chadha moved to
terminate the proceedings on the ground that § 244(c)(2) is unconstitutional.

[some relevant legislative history]

The Immigration Act of 1924 required
the Secretary of Labor to deport any alien who entered or remained in the
United States unlawfully. The only means by which a deportable alien could
lawfully remain in the United States was to have his status altered by a
private bill enacted by both Houses and presented to the President pursuant to
the procedures set out in Art. I, § 7 of the Constitution. These private bills
were found intolerable by Congress. In the debate on a 1937 bill introduced by
Representative Dies to authorize the Secretary to grant permanent residence in
"meritorious" cases, Dies stated:

> It was my original thought that the way to handle all these meritorious cases was through special bills. I am absolutely convinced as a result of what has occurred in this House that it is impossible to deal with the situation through special bills. We had a demonstration of that fact not long ago when 15 special bills were before the House. The House consumed 51/2 hours considering four bills and made no disposition of any of these bills." 

Congress first authorized the Attorney General to suspend the deportation of
certain aliens in the Alien Registration Act of 1940. That Act provided that an alien was to be deported, despite the Attorney General's decision to the contrary, if both Houses, by concurrent resolution, disapproved the suspension.

In 1948, Congress amended the Act to broaden the category of aliens eligible
for suspension of deportation. In addition, however, Congress limited the
authority of the Attorney General to suspend deportations by providing that
the Attorney General could not cancel a deportation unless both Houses
affirmatively voted by concurrent resolution to _approve_ the Attorney
General's action.  The provision
for approval by concurrent resolution in the 1948 Act proved almost as
burdensome as private bills. 

The proposal to permit one House of Congress to veto the Attorney General's
suspension of an alien's deportation was incorporated in the Immigration and
Nationality Act of 1952. Plainly, Congress'
desire to retain a veto in this area cannot be considered in isolation but
must be viewed in the context of Congress' irritation with the burden of
private immigration bills. 

[...]

We turn now to the question whether action of one House of Congress under §
244(c)(2) violates strictures of the Constitution. [T]he fact that a given law or procedure is efficient,
convenient, and useful in facilitating functions of government, standing
alone, will not save it if it is contrary to the Constitution. Convenience and
efficiency are not the primary objectives--or the hallmarks--of democratic
government and our inquiry is sharpened rather than blunted by the fact that
Congressional veto provisions are appearing with increasing frequency in
statutes which delegate authority to executive and independent agencies.

64

Justice WHITE undertakes to make a case for the proposition that the one-House
veto is a useful "political invention," and we need not
challenge that assertion. We can even concede this utilitarian argument
although the long range political wisdom of this "invention" is arguable.  But policy arguments supporting even useful
"political inventions" are subject to the demands of the Constitution which
defines powers and, with respect to this subject, sets out just how those
powers are to be exercised.

Explicit and unambiguous provisions of the Constitution prescribe and define
the respective functions of the Congress and of the Executive in the
legislative process. Since the precise terms of those familiar provisions are
critical to the resolution of this case, we set them out verbatim. Art. I
provides:

> All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a Senate *and* a House of Representatives." Art. I, § 1\. (Emphasis added).


> "Every Bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives *and* the Senate, *shall,* before it becomes a Law, be presented to the President of the United States; . . ." Art. I, § 7, cl. 2. (Emphasis added).

> " *Every* Order, Resolution, or Vote to which the Concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of Adjournment) *shall be* presented to the President of the United States; and before the Same shall take Effect, *shall be* approved by him, or being disapproved by him, *shall be* repassed by two thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the Rules and Limitations prescribed in the Case of a Bill." Art. I, § 7, cl. 3. (Emphasis added).

These provisions of Art. I are integral parts of the constitutional design for
the separation of powers.  

[some stuff from the framers]

We see therefore that the Framers were acutely conscious that the bicameral
requirement and the Presentment Clauses would serve essential constitutional
functions. The President's participation in the legislative process was to
protect the Executive Branch from Congress and to protect the whole people
from improvident laws. The division of the Congress into two distinctive
bodies assures that the legislative power would be exercised only after
opportunity for full study and debate in separate settings. The President's
unilateral veto power, in turn, was limited by the power of two thirds of both
Houses of Congress to overrule a veto thereby precluding final arbitrary
action of one person. It emerges clearly
that the prescription for legislative action in Art. I, §§ 1, 7 represents the
Framers' decision that the legislative power of the Federal government be
exercised in accord with a single, finely wrought and exhaustively considered,
procedure.


[W]e must nevertheless establish that the
challenged action under § 244(c)(2) is of the kind to which the procedural
requirements of Art. I, § 7 apply. Not every action taken by either House is
subject to the bicameralism and presentment requirements of Art. I. Whether actions taken by either House are, in law and fact, an
exercise of legislative power depends not on their form but upon "whether they
contain matter which is properly to be regarded as legislative in its
character and effect." 

Examination of the action taken here by one House pursuant to § 244(c)(2)
reveals that it was essentially legislative in purpose and effect. In
purporting to exercise power defined in Art. I, § 8, cl. 4 to "establish an
uniform Rule of Naturalization," the House took action that had the purpose
and effect of altering the legal rights, duties and relations of persons,
including the Attorney General, Executive Branch officials and Chadha, all
outside the legislative branch. Section 244(c)(2) purports to authorize one
House of Congress to require the Attorney General to deport an individual
alien whose deportation otherwise would be cancelled under § 244\. The one-
House veto operated in this case to overrule the Attorney General and mandate
Chadha's deportation; absent the House action, Chadha would remain in the
United States. Congress has acted and its action has altered Chadha's
status.

The legislative character of the one-House veto in this case is confirmed by
the character of the Congressional action it supplants. Neither the House of
Representatives nor the Senate contends that, absent the veto provision in §
244(c)(2), either of them, or both of them acting together, could effectively
require the Attorney General to deport an alien once the Attorney General, in
the exercise of legislatively delegated authority,16 had determined the alien
should remain in the United States. Without the challenged provision in §
244(c)(2), this could have been achieved, if at all, only by legislation
requiring deportation. Similarly, a veto by one House of Congress under §
244(c)(2) cannot be justified as an attempt at amending the standards set out
in § 244(a)(1), or as a repeal of § 244 as applied to Chadha. Amendment and
repeal of statutes, no less than enactment, must conform with Art. I.


The nature of the decision implemented by the one-House veto in this case
further manifests its legislative character. After long experience with the
clumsy, time consuming private bill procedure, Congress made a deliberate
choice to delegate to the Executive Branch, and specifically to the Attorney
General, the authority to allow deportable aliens to remain in this country in
certain specified circumstances. It is not disputed that this choice to
delegate authority is precisely the kind of decision that can be implemented
only in accordance with the procedures set out in Art. I. Disagreement with
the Attorney General's decision on Chadha's deportation--that is, Congress'
decision to deport Chadha--no less than Congress' original choice to delegate
to the Attorney General the authority to make that decision, involves
determinations of policy that Congress can implement in only one way;
bicameral passage followed by presentment to the President. Congress must
abide by its delegation of authority until that delegation is legislatively
altered or revoked.


Finally, we see that when the Framers intended to authorize either House of
Congress to act alone and outside of its prescribed bicameral legislative
role, they narrowly and precisely defined the procedure for such action. There
are but four provisions in the Constitution, explicit and unambiguous, by
which one House may act alone with the unreviewable force of law, not subject
to the President's veto:

(a) The House of Representatives alone was given the power to initiate
impeachments. 

(b) The Senate alone was given the power to conduct trials following
impeachment on charges initiated by the House and to convict following trial.


(c) The Senate alone was given final unreviewable power to approve or to
disapprove presidential appointments. 

(d) The Senate alone was given unreviewable power to ratify treaties
negotiated by the President. 

Clearly, when the Draftsmen sought to confer special powers on one House,
independent of the other House, or of the President, they did so in explicit,
unambiguous terms. These carefully defined exceptions from presentment and
bicameralism underscore the difference between the legislative functions of
Congress and other unilateral but important and binding one-House acts
provided for in the Constitution. These exceptions are narrow, explicit, and
separately justified; none of them authorize the action challenged here. On
the contrary, they provide further support for the conclusion that
Congressional authority is not to be implied and for the conclusion that the
veto provided for in § 244(c)(2) is not authorized by the constitutional
design of the powers of the Legislative Branch.

Since it is clear that the action by the House under § 244(c)(2) was not
within any of the express constitutional exceptions authorizing one House to
act alone, and equally clear that it was an exercise of legislative power,
that action was subject to the standards prescribed in Article I. 

**Justice WHITE, dissenting.**

Today the Court not only invalidates § 244(c)(2) of the Immigration and
Nationality Act, but also sounds the death knell for nearly 200 other
statutory provisions in which Congress has reserved a "legislative veto." For
this reason, the Court's decision is of surpassing importance. And it is for
this reason that the Court would have been well-advised to decide the case, if
possible, on the narrower grounds of separation of powers, leaving for full
consideration the constitutionality of other congressional review statutes
operating on such varied matters as war powers and agency rulemaking, some of
which concern the independent regulatory agencies.

The prominence of the legislative veto mechanism in our contemporary political
system and its importance to Congress can hardly be overstated. It has become
a central means by which Congress secures the accountability of executive and
independent agencies. Without the legislative veto, Congress is faced with a
Hobson's choice: either to refrain from delegating the necessary authority,
leaving itself with a hopeless task of writing laws with the requisite
specificity to cover endless special circumstances across the entire policy
landscape, or in the alternative, to abdicate its law-making function to the
executive branch and independent agencies. To choose the former leaves major
national problems unresolved; to opt for the latter risks unaccountable
policymaking by those not elected to fill that role. Accordingly, over the
past five decades, the legislative veto has been placed in nearly 200
statutes. The device is known in every field of governmental concern:
reorganization, budgets, foreign affairs, war powers, and regulation of trade,
safety, energy, the environment and the economy.

The legislative veto developed initially in response to the problems of reorganizing the sprawling government structure created in response to the Depression. The Reorganization Acts established the chief model for the legislative veto. When President Hoover requested authority to reorganize the government in 1929, he coupled his request that the "Congress be willing to delegate its authority over the problem (subject to defined principles) to the Executive" with a proposal for legislative review. He proposed that the Executive "should act upon approval of a joint committee of Congress or with the reservation of power of revision by Congress within some limited period adequate for its consideration."  Congress followed President Hoover's suggestion and authorized reorganization subject to legislative review.  Although the reorganization authority reenacted in 1933 did not contain a legislative veto provision, the provision returned during the Roosevelt Administration and has since been renewed numerous times. Over the years, the provision was used extensively. Presidents submitted 115 reorganization plans to Congress of which 23 were disapproved by Congress pursuant to legislative veto provisions. 


Shortly after adoption of the Reorganization Act of 1939,
Congress and the President applied the legislative veto procedure to resolve
the delegation problem for national security and foreign affairs. World War II
occasioned the need to transfer greater authority to the President in these
areas. The legislative veto offered the means by which Congress could confer
additional authority while preserving its own constitutional role. During
World War II, Congress enacted over thirty statutes conferring powers on the
Executive with legislative veto provisions. President Roosevelt accepted the
veto as the necessary price for obtaining exceptional authority.

[more examples]

Even this brief review suffices to demonstrate that the legislative veto is
more than "efficient, convenient, and useful." It is an
important if not indispensable political invention that allows the President
and Congress to resolve major constitutional and policy differences, assures
the accountability of independent regulatory agencies, and preserves Congress'
control over lawmaking. Perhaps there are other means of accommodation and
accountability, but the increasing reliance of Congress upon the legislative
veto suggests that the alternatives to which Congress must now turn are not
entirely satisfactory.

The history of the legislative veto also makes clear that it has not been a
sword with which Congress has struck out to aggrandize itself at the expense
of the other branches--the concerns of Madison and Hamilton. Rather, the veto
has been a means of defense, a reservation of ultimate authority necessary if
Congress is to fulfill its designated role under Article I as the nation's
lawmaker. While the President has often objected to particular legislative
vetoes, generally those left in the hands of congressional committees, the
Executive has more often agreed to legislative review as the price for a broad
delegation of authority. To be sure, the President may have preferred
unrestricted power, but that could be precisely why Congress thought it
essential to retain a check on the exercise of delegated authority.



There is
no question that a bill does not become a law until it is approved by both the
House and the Senate, and presented to the President. Similarly, I would not
hesitate to strike an action of Congress in the form of a concurrent
resolution which constituted an exercise of original lawmaking authority. I
agree with the Court that the President's qualified veto power is a critical
element in the distribution of powers under the Constitution, widely endorsed
among the Framers, and intended to serve the President as a defense against
legislative encroachment and to check the "passing of bad laws through haste,
inadvertence, or design." I also agree that the bicameral approval required by Art. I, §§ 1, 7 "was of scarcely less concern to the Framers than was the Presidential veto," and that the need to divide and disperse legislative power figures
significantly in our scheme of Government. All of this, the Third Part of the
Court's opinion, is entirely unexceptionable.


It does not, however, answer the constitutional question before us. The power
to exercise a legislative veto is not the power to write new law without
bicameral approval or presidential consideration. The veto must be authorized
by statute and may only negative what an Executive department or independent
agency has proposed. On its face, the legislative veto no more allows one
House of Congress to make law than does the presidential veto confer such
power upon the President. 

The terms of the Presentment Clauses suggest only that bills and their
equivalent are subject to the requirements of bicameral passage and
presentment to the President. Article I, § 7, cl. 2, stipulates only that
"Every Bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the
Senate, shall before it becomes a Law, be presented to the President" for
approval or disapproval, his disapproval then subject to being overridden by a
two-thirds vote of both houses. 

Although [Section 7, Clause 3] does not specify the actions for which the concurrence of
both houses is "necessary," the proceedings at the Philadelphia Convention
suggest its purpose was to prevent Congress from circumventing the
presentation requirement in the making of new legislation.  The chosen language,
Madison's comment, and the brevity of the Convention's consideration, all
suggest a modest role was intended for the Clause and no broad restraint on
Congressional authority was contemplated.  This reading is
consistent with the historical background of the Presentation Clause itself
which reveals only that the Framers were concerned with limiting the methods
for enacting new legislation. The Framers were aware of the experience in
Pennsylvania where the legislature had evaded the requirements attached to the
passing of legislation by the use of "resolves," and the criticisms directed
at this practice by the Council of Censors. There is no record that the
Convention contemplated, let alone intended, that these Article I requirements
would someday be invoked to restrain the scope of Congressional authority
pursuant to duly-enacted law.

When the Convention did turn its attention to the scope of Congress' lawmaking
power, the Framers were expansive. The Necessary and Proper Clause, Art. I, §
8, cl. 18, vests Congress with the power "to make all laws which shall be
necessary and proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers [the
enumerated powers of § 8], and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in
the government of the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof."
It is long-settled that Congress may "exercise its best judgment in the
selection of measures, to carry into execution the constitutional powers of
the government," and "avail itself of experience, to exercise its reason, and
to accommodate its legislation to circumstances." 

The Court heeded this counsel in approving the modern administrative state.
The Court's holding today that all legislative-type action must be enacted
through the lawmaking process ignores that legislative authority is routinely
delegated to the Executive branch, to the independent regulatory agencies, and
to private individuals and groups.

This Court's decisions sanctioning such delegations make clear that Article I
does not require all action with the effect of legislation to be passed as a
law.

Theoretically, agencies and officials were asked only to "fill up the
details," and the rule was that "Congress cannot delegate any part of its
legislative power except under a limitation of a prescribed standard."  In practice, however, restrictions on the scope of the
power that could be delegated diminished and all but disappeared. In only two
instances did the Court find an unconstitutional delegation. Panama Refining
Co. v. Ryan, (1935); Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States (1935). In other cases, the "intelligible principle" through which agencies
have attained enormous control over the economic affairs of the country was
held to include such formulations as "just and reasonable," 
"public interest," "public convenience, interest, or
necessity," and "unfair methods of
competition." 


The wisdom and the constitutionality of these broad delegations are matters
that still have not been put to rest. But for present purposes, these cases
establish that by virtue of congressional delegation, legislative power can be
exercised by independent agencies and Executive departments without the
passage of new legislation. For some time, the sheer amount of law--the
substantive rules that regulate private conduct and direct the operation of
government--made by the agencies has far outnumbered the lawmaking engaged in
by Congress through the traditional process. There is no question but that
agency rulemaking is lawmaking in any functional or realistic sense of the
term. 

If Congress may delegate lawmaking power to independent and executive
agencies, it is most difficult to understand Article I as forbidding Congress
from also reserving a check on legislative power for itself. Absent the veto,
the agencies receiving delegations of legislative or quasi-legislative power
may issue regulations having the force of law without bicameral approval and
without the President's signature. It is thus not apparent why the reservation
of a veto over the exercise of that legislative power must be subject to a
more exacting test. In both cases, it is enough that the initial statutory
authorizations comply with the Article I requirements.


Nor are there strict limits on the agents that may receive such delegations of
legislative authority so that it might be said that the legislature can
delegate authority to others but not to itself. While most authority to issue
rules and regulations is given to the executive branch and the independent
regulatory agencies, statutory delegations to private persons have also passed
this Court's scrutiny. In Currin v. Wallace, the statute provided that restrictions upon the production or marketing of agricultural commodities was to become effective only upon the favorable vote by a prescribed majority of the affected farmers. United
States v. Rock Royal Co-operative upheld an act which gave producers of specified commodities the right to veto marketing orders issued by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Assuming _Currin_ and _Rock Royal Co-operative_ remain sound law, the Court's
decision today suggests that Congress may place a "veto" power over
suspensions of deportation in private hands or in the hands of an independent
agency, but is forbidden from reserving such authority for itself. Perhaps
this odd result could be justified on other constitutional grounds, such as
the separation of powers, but certainly it cannot be defended as consistent
with the Court's view of the Article I presentmemt and bicameralism
commands.


[E]ven if the Court correctly characterizes the Attorney
General's authority under § 244 as an Article II Executive power, the Court
concedes that certain administrative agency action, such as rulemaking, "may
resemble lawmaking" and recognizes that "[t]his Court has referred to agency
activity as being 'quasi-legislative' in character. Such rules and adjudications by the agencies meet the
Court's own definition of legislative action for they "alter[ ] the legal
rights, duties, and relations of persons . . . outside the legislative
branch,"  and involve "determinations of policy,"  at
954. Under the Court's analys s, the Executive Branch and the independent
agencies may make rules with the effect of law while Congress, in whom the
Framers confided the legislative power,  may not exercise a veto
which precludes such rules from having operative force. If the effective
functioning of a complex modern government requires the delegation of vast
authority which, by virtue of its breadth, is legislative or "quasi-
legislative" in character, I cannot accept that Article I--which is, after
all, the source of the non-delegation doctrine--should forbid Congress from
qualifying that grant with a legislative veto.


I regret that I am in disagreement with my colleagues on the fundamental
questions that this case presents. But even more I regret the destructive
scope of the Court's holding. It reflects a profoundly different conception of
the Constitution than that held by the Courts which sanctioned the modern
administrative state. Today's decision strikes down in one fell swoop
provisions in more laws enacted by Congress than the Court has cumulatively
invalidated in its history. I fear it will now be more difficult "to insure
that the fundamental policy decisions in our society will be made not by an
appointed official but by the body immediately responsible to the people,"
 I must dissent.

\newpage
