# United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683 (1974)


**Mr. Chief Justice BURGER delivered the opinion of the Court.**

1
This litigation presents for review the denial of a motion, filed in the
District Court on behalf of the President of the United States, in the case of
United States v. Mitchell et al. to quash a third-
party subpoena duces tecum issued by the United States District Court for the
District of Columbia, pursuant to Fed.Rule Crim.Proc. 17(c). The subpoena
directed the President to produce certain tape recordings and documents
relating to his conversations with aides and advisers. The court rejected the
President's claims of absolute executive privilege, of lack of jurisdiction,
and of failure to satisfy the requirements of Rule 17(c). 


On March 1, 1974, a grand jury of the United States District Court for the
District of Columbia returned an indictment charging seven named individuals
with various offenses, including conspiracy to defraud the United States and
to obstruct justice. Although he was not designated as such in the indictment,
the grand jury named the President, among others, as an unindicted
coconspirator. On April 18, 1974, upon motion of the Special Prosecutor,a subpoena duces tecum was issued pursuant to Rule 17(c) to the
President by the United States District Court and made returnable on May 2,
1974. 

On May 20, 1974, the District Court denied the motion to quash and the motions
to expunge and for protective orders. 377 F.Supp. 1326. It further ordered
'the President or any subordinate officer, official, or employee with custody
or control of the documents or objects subpoenaed,' id., at 1331 to deliver to
the District Court, on or before May 31, 1974, the originals of all subpoenaed
items, as well as an index and analysis of those items, together with tape
copies of those portions of the subpoenaed recordings for which transcripts
had been released to the public by the President on April 30. The District
Court rejected jurisdictional challenges based on a contention that the
dispute was nonjusticiable because it was between the Special Prosecutor and
the Chief Executive and hence 'intra-executive' in character; it also rejected
the contention that the Judiciary was without authority to review an assertion
of executive privilege by the President. 


The District Court held that the judiciary, not the President, was the final
arbiter of a claim of executive privilege. The court concluded that under the
circumstances of this case the presumptive privilege was overcome by the
Special Prosecutor's prima facie 'demonstration of need sufficiently
compelling to warrant judicial examination in chambers . . ..' 

In the District Court, the President's counsel argued that the court lacked
jurisdiction to issue the subpoena because the matter was an intra-branch
dispute between a subordinate and superior officer of the Executive Branch and
hence not subject to judicial resolution. That argument has been renewed in
this Court with emphasis on the contention that the dispute does not present a
'case' or 'controversy' which can be adjudicated in the federal courts. The
President's counsel argues that the federal courts should not intrude into
areas committed to the other branches of Government. He views the present
dispute as essentially a 'jurisdictional' dispute within the Executive Branch
which he analogizes to a dispute between two congressional committees. Since
the Executive Branch has exclusive authority and absolute discretion to decide
whether to prosecute a case, it is
contended that a President's decision is final in determining what evidence is
to be used in a given criminal case. Although his counsel concedes that the
President has delegated certain specific powers to the Special Prosecutor, he
has not 'waived nor delegated to the Special Prosecutor the President's duty
to claim privilege as to all materials . . . which fall within the President's
inherent authority to refuse to disclose to any executive officer.'  The Special Prosecutor's demand for the items therefore
presents, in the view of the President's counsel, a political question under
Baker v. Carr, since it involves a 'textually demonstrable' grant of power under Art. II.


Our starting point is the nature of the proceeding for which the evidence is
sought--here a pending criminal prosecution. It is a judicial proceeding in a
federal court alleging violation of federal laws and is brought in the name of
the United States as sovereign.  Under the authority of Art. II, ยง 2,
Congress has vested in the Attorney General the power to conduct the criminal
litigation of the United States Government.  It has also
vested in him the power to appoint subordinate officers to assist him in the
discharge of his duties.  Acting pursuant to
those statutes, the Attorney General has delegated the authority to represent
the United States in these particular matters to a Special Prosecutor with
unique authority and tenure. The regulation gives the Special Prosecutor
explicit power to contest the invocation of executive privilege in the process
of seeking evidence deemed relevant to the performance of these specially
delegated duties.

So long as this regulation is extant it has the force of law. In United States
ex rel. Accardi v. Shaughnessy, regulations of the Attorney General delegated certain of his discretionary powers to the Board of Immigration Appeals and required that
Board to exercise its own discretion on appeals in deportation cases. The
Court held that so long as the Attorney General's regulations remained
operative, he denied himself the authority to exercise the discretion
delegated to the Board even though the original authority was his and he could
reassert it by amending the regulations. 

Here, as in Accardi, it is theoretically possible for the Attorney General to
amend or revoke the regulation defining the Special Prosecutor's authority.
But he has not done so. So long as this regulation remains in force the
Executive Branch is bound by it, and indeed the United States as the sovereign
composed of the three branches is bound to respect and to enforce it.
Moreover, the delegation of authority to the Special Prosecutor in this case
is not an ordinary delegation by the Attorney General to a subordinate
officer: with the authorization of the President, the Acting Attorney General
provided in the regulation that the Special Prosecutor was not to be removed
without the 'consensus' of eight designated leaders of Congress. 

The demands of and the resistance to the subpoena present an obvious
controversy in the ordinary sense, but that alone is not sufficient to meet
constitutional standards. In the constitutional sense, controversy means more
than disagreement and conflict; rather it means the kind of controversy courts
traditionally resolve. Here at issue is the production or nonproduction of
specified evidence deemed by the Special Prosecutor to be relevant and
admissible in a pending criminal case. It is sought by one official of the
Executive Branch within the scope of his express authority; it is resisted by
the Chief Executive on the ground of his duty to preserve the confidentiality
of the communications of the President. Whatever the correct answer on the
merits, these issues are 'of a type which are traditionally justiciable.' The independent
Special Prosecutor with his asserted need for the subpoenaed material in the
underlying criminal prosecution is opposed by the President with his steadfast
assertion of privilege against disclosure of the material. This setting
assures there is 'that concrete adverseness which sharpens the presentation of
issues upon which the court so largely depends for illumination of difficult
constitutional questions'. Baker v. Carr.
Moreover, since the matter is one arising in the regular course of a federal
criminal prosecution, it is within the traditional scope of Art. III power.
Id., at 198, 82 S.Ct. 691.


In light of the uniqueness of the setting in which the conflict arises, the
fact that both parties are officers of the Executive Branch cannot be viewed
as a barrier to justiciability. It would be inconsistent with the applicable
law and regulation, and the unique facts of this case to conclude other than
that the Special Prosecutor has standing to bring this action and that a
justiciable controversy is presented for decision.

[W]e turn to the claim that the subpoena should be quashed because it demands
'confidential conversations between a President and his close advisors that it
would be inconsistent with the public interest to produce.'  The
first contention is a broad claim that the separation of powers doctrine
precludes judicial review of a President's claim of privilege. The second
contention is that if he does not prevail on the claim of absolute privilege,
the court should hold as a matter of constitutional law that the privilege
prevails over the subpoena duces tecum.


In support of his claim of absolute privilege, the President's counsel urges
two grounds, one of which is common to all governments and one of which is
peculiar to our system of separation of powers. The first ground is the valid
need for protection of communications between high Government officials and
those who advise and assist them in the performance of their manifold duties;
the importance of this confidentiality is too plain to require further
discussion. Human experience teaches that those who expect public
dissemination of their remarks may well temper candor with a concern for
appearances and for their own interests to the detriment of the decisionmaking
process. Whatever the nature of the privilege of confidentiality of
Presidential communications in the exercise of Art. II powers, the privilege
can be said to derive from the supremacy of each branch within its own
assigned area of constitutional duties. Certain powers and privileges flow
from the nature of enumerated powers; the protection of the confidentiality
of Presidential communications has similar constitutional underpinnings.

The second ground asserted by the President's counsel in support of the claim
of absolute privilege rests on the doctrine of separation of powers. Here it
is argued that the independence of the Executive Branch within its own sphere,
Humphrey's Executor v. United States, insulates a President from a judicial subpoena in an
ongoing criminal prosecution, and thereby protects confidential Presidential
communications.


However, neither the doctrine of separation of powers, nor the need for
confidentiality of high-level communications, without more, can sustain an
absolute, unqualified Presidential privilege of immunity from judicial process
under all circumstances. The President's need for complete candor and
objectivity from advisers calls for great deference from the courts. However,
when the privilege depends solely on the broad, undifferentiated claim of
public interest in the confidentiality of such conversations, a confrontation
with other values arises. Absent a claim of need to protect military,
diplomatic, or sensitive national security secrets, we find it difficult to
accept the argument that even the very important interest in confidentiality
of Presidential communications is significantly diminished by production of
such material for in camera inspection with all the protection that a district
court will be obliged to provide.

The impediment that an absolute, unqualified privilege would place in the way
of the primary constitutional duty of the Judicial Branch to do justice in
criminal prosecutions would plainly conflict with the function of the courts
under Art. III. In designing the structure of our Government and dividing and
allocating the sovereign power among three co-equal branches, the Framers of
the Constitution sought to provide a comprehensive system, but the separate
powers were not intended to operate with absolute independence.

To read the Art. II powers of the President as providing an absolute privilege
as against a subpoena essential to enforcement of criminal statutes on no more
than a generalized claim of the public interest in confidentiality of
nonmilitary and nondiplomatic discussions would upset the constitutional
balance of 'a workable government' and gravely impair the role of the courts
under Art. III.

Since we conclude that the legitimate needs of the judicial process may
outweigh Presidential privilege, it is necessary to resolve those competing
interests in a manner that preserves the essential functions of each branch.
The right and indeed the duty to resolve that question does not free the
Judiciary from according high respect to the representations made on behalf of
the President. 

The expectation of a President to the confidentiality of his conversations and
correspondence, like the claim of confidentiality of judicial deliberations,
for example, has all the values to which we accord deference for the privacy
of all citizens and, added to those values, is the necessity for protection of
the public interest in candid, objective, and even blunt or harsh opinions in
Presidential decisionmaking. A President and those who assist him must be free
to explore alternatives in the process of shaping policies and making
decisions and to do so in a way many would be unwilling to express except
privately. These are the considerations justifying a presumptive privilege for
Presidential communications. The privilege is fundamental to the operation of
Government and inextricably rooted in the separation of powers under the
Constitution.

But this presumptive privilege must be considered in light of our historic
commitment to the rule of law. This is nowhere more profoundly manifest than
in our view that 'the twofold aim (of criminal justice) is that guilt shall
not escape or innocence suffer.'  We have elected to employ an adversary system of criminal justice in which the parties contest all issues before a court of law. The
need to develop all relevant facts in the adversary system is both fundamental
and comprehensive. The ends of criminal justice would be defeated if judgments
were to be founded on a partial or speculative presentation of the facts. The
very integrity of the judicial system and public confidence in the system
depend on full disclosure of all the facts, within the framework of the rules
of evidence. To ensure that justice is done, it is imperative to the function
of courts that compulsory process be available for the production of evidence
needed either by the prosecution or by the defense.



The privileges referred to by the Court are designed to protect weighty and
legitimate competing interests. Thus, the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution
provides that no man 'shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness
against himself.' And, generally, an attorney or a priest may not be required
to disclose what has been revealed in professional confidence. These and other
interests are recognized in law by privileges against forced disclosure,
established in the Constitution, by statute, or at common law. Whatever their
origins, these exceptions to the demand for every man's evidence are not
lightly created nor expansively construed, for they are in derogation of the
search for truth.

In this case the President challenges a subpoena served on him as a third
party requiring the production of materials for use in a criminal prosecution;
he does so on the claim that he has a privilege against diclosure of
confidential communications. He does not place his claim of privilege on the
ground they are military or diplomatic secrets. As to these areas of Art. II
duties the courts have traditionally shown the utmost deference to
Presidential responsibilities. In C. & S. Air Lines v. Waterman S.S. Corp., dealing with
Presidential authority involving foreign policy considerations, the Court
said:

> The President, both as Commander-in-Chief and as the Nation's organ for foreign affairs, has available intelligence services whose reports are not and ought not to be published to the world. It would be intolerable that courts, without the relevant information, should review and perhaps nullify actions of the Executive taken on information properly held secret.


In United States v. Reynolds, dealing with a claimant's demand for evidence in a Tort Claims Act case against the Government, the Court said:

> It may be possible to satisfy the court, from all the circumstances of the case, that there is a reasonable danger that compulsion of the evidence will expose military matters which, in the interest of national security, should not be divulged. When this is the case, the occasion for the privilege is appropriate, and the court should not jeopardize the security which the privilege is meant to protect by insisting upon an examination of the evidence, even by the judge alone, in chambers.' 

No case of the Court, however, has extended this high degree of deference to a
President's generalized interest in confidentiality. Nowhere in the
Constitution, as we have noted earlier, is there any explicit reference to a
privilege of confidentiality, yet to the extent this interest relates to the
effective discharge of a President's powers, it is constitutionally based.


The right to the production of all evidence at a criminal trial similarly has
constitutional dimensions. The Sixth Amendment explicitly confers upon every
defendant in a criminal trial the right 'to be confronted with the witnesses
against him' and 'to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his
favor. Moreover, the Fifth Amendment also guarantees that no person shall be
deprived of liberty without due process of law. It is the manifest duty of the
courts to vindicate those guarantees, and to accomplish that it is essential
that all relevant and admissible evidence be produced.

In this case we must weigh the importance of the general privilege of
confidentiality of Presidential communications in performance of the
President's responsibilities against the inroads of such a privilege on the
fair administration of criminal justice. The interest in preserving
confidentiality is weighty indeed and entitled to great respect. However, we
cannot conclude that advisers will be moved to temper the candor of their
remarks by the infrequent occasions of disclosure because of the possibility
that such conversations will be called for in the context of a criminal
prosecution.

On the other hand, the allowance of the privilege to withhold evidence that is
demonstrably relevant in a criminal trial would cut deeply into the guarantee
of due process of law and gravely impair the basic function of the courts. A
President's acknowledged need for confidentiality in the communications of his
office is general in nature, whereas the constitutional need for production of
relevant evidence in a criminal proceeding is specific and central to the fair
adjudication of a particular criminal case in the administration of justice.
Without access to specific facts a criminal prosecution may be totally
frustrated. The President's broad interest in confidentiality of
communications will not be vitiated by disclosure of a limited number of
conversations preliminarily shown to have some bearing on the pending criminal
cases.

We conclude that when the ground for asserting privilege as to subpoenaed
materials sought for use in a criminal trial is based only on the generalized
interest in confidentiality, it cannot prevail over the fundamental demands of
due process of law in the fair administration of criminal justice. The
generalized assertion of privilege must yield to the demonstrated, specific
need for evidence in a pending criminal trial.

\newpage
