# McCulloch v. Maryland

17 U.S. 316 (1819)

[From the reporter's summary]

It is admitted by the parties in this cause, by their counsel, that there was
passed, on the 10th day of April 1816, by the congress of the United States,
an act, entitled, 'an act to incorporate the subscribers to the Bank of the
United States;' and that there was passed on the 11th day of February 1818, by
the general assembly of Maryland, an act, entitled, 'an act to impose a tax on
all banks, or branches thereof, in the state of Maryland, not chartered by the
legislature.' It is further admitted, that the president, directors and company of
the Bank of the United States, incorporated by the act of congress aforesaid,
did organize themselves, and go into full operation, in the city of
Philadelphia, in the state of Pennsylvania, in pursuance of the said act, and
that they did establish a branch of the said
bank in the city of Baltimore, in the
state of Maryland, which has until the first day of May 1818,
ever since transacted and carried on business as a branch of the said Bank of the United States. It is further
admitted, that the said president, directors and company of the said bank, had
no authority to establish the said branch, or office of discount and deposit,
at the city of Baltimore, from the state of Maryland, otherwise than the said
state having adopted the constitution of the United States and composing one
of the states of the Union. 

It is further admitted, that James William
McCulloch, the defendant below, being the cashier of the said branch, or
office of discount and deposit, did, on the several days set forth in the
declaration in this cause, issue the said respective bank-notes therein
described, from the said branch or office, to a certain George Williams, in
the city of Baltimore, in part payment of a promissory note of the said
Williams, discounted by the said branch or office, which said respective bank-
notes were not, nor was either of them, so issued, on stamped paper, in the
manner prescribed by the act of assembly aforesaid [*i.e., they didn't pay the required Maryland tax to get the stamp*]. It is further admitted,
that the said president, directors and company of the Bank of the United
States, and the said branch, or office of discount and deposit, have not, nor
has either of them, paid in advance, or otherwise, the sum of $15,000, to the
treasurer of the Western Shore, for the use of the state of Maryland, before
the issuing of the said notes, or any of them, nor since those periods. And it
is further admitted, that the treasurer of the Western Shore of Mayland, under
the direction of the governor and council of the said state, was ready, and
offered to deliver to the said president, directors and company of the said
bank, and to the said branch, or office of discount and deposit, stamped paper
of the kind and denomination required and described in the said act of
assembly.

The question submitted to the court for their decision in this case, is, as to
the validity of the said act of the general assembly of Maryland, on the
ground of its being repugnant to the constitution of the United States, and
the act of congress aforesaid, or to one of them. 





**MARSHALL, Ch. J., delivered the opinion of the court.**
 

In the case now to be determined, the defendant, a sovereign state, denies the
obligation of a law enacted by the legislature of the Union, and the
plaintiff, on his part, contests the validity of an act which has been passed
by the legislature of that state. The constitution of our country, in its most
interesting and vital parts, is to be considered; the conflicting powers of
the government of the Union and of its members, as marked in that
constitution, are to be discussed; and an opinion given, which may essentially
influence the great operations of the government. No tribunal can approach
such a question without a deep sense of its importance, and of the awful
responsibility involved in its decision. But it must be decided peacefully, or
remain a source of hostile legislation, perhaps, of hostility of a still more
serious nature; and if it is to be so decided, by this tribunal alone can the
decision be made. On the supreme court of the United States has the
constitution of our country devolved this important duty.

The first question made in the cause is--has congress power to incorporate a
bank? It has been truly said, that this can scarcely be considered as an open
question, entirely unprejudiced by the former proceedings of the nation
respecting it. The principle now contested was introduced at a very early
period of our history, has been recognised by many successive legislatures,
and has been acted upon by the judicial department, in cases of peculiar
delicacy, as a law of undoubted obligation.

It will not be denied, that a bold and daring usurpation might be resisted,
after an acquiescence still longer and more complete than this. But it is
conceived, that a doubtful question, one on which human reason may pause, and
the human judgment be suspended, in the decision of which the great principles
of liberty are not concerned, but the respective powers of those who are
equally the representatives of the people, are to be adjusted; if not put at
rest by the practice of the government, ought to receive a considerable
impression from that practice. An exposition of the constitution, deliberately
established by legislative acts, on the faith of which an immense property has
been advanced, ought not to be lightly disregarded.

The power now contested was exercised by the first congress elected under the
present constitution. The bill for incorporating the Bank of the United States
did not steal upon an unsuspecting legislature, and pass unobserved. Its
principle was completely understood, and was opposed with equal zeal and
ability. After being resisted, first, in the fair and open field of debate,
and afterwards, in the executive cabinet, with as much persevering talent as
any measure has ever experienced, and being supported by arguments which
convinced minds as pure and as intelligent as this country can boast, it
became a law. The original act was permitted to expire; but a short experience
of the embarrassments to which the refusal to revive it exposed the
government, convinced those who were most prejudiced against the measure of
its necessity, and induced the passage of the present law. It would require no
ordinary share of intrepidity, to assert that a measure adopted under these
circumstances, was a bold and plain usurpation, to which the constitution gave
no countenance. These observations belong to the cause; but they are not made
under the impression, that, were the question entirely new, the law would be
found irreconcilable with the constitution.

In discussing this question, the counsel for the state of Maryland have deemed
it of some importance, in the construction of the constitution, to consider
that instrument, not as emanating from the people, but as the act of sovereign
and independent states. The powers of the general government, it has been
said, are delegated by the states, who alone are truly sovereign; and must be
exercised in subordination to the states, who alone possess supreme dominion.
It would be difficult to sustain this proposition. The convention which framed
the constitution was indeed elected by the state legislatures. But the
instrument, when it came from their hands, was a mere proposal, without
obligation, or pretensions to it. It was reported to the then existing
congress of the United States, with a request that it might 'be submitted to a
convention of delegates, chosen in each state by the people thereof, under the
recommendation of its legislature, for their assent and ratification.' This
mode of proceeding was adopted; and by the convention, by congress, and by the
state legislatures, the instrument was submitted to the people. They acted
upon it in the only manner in which they can act safely, effectively and
wisely, on such a subject, by assembling in convention. It is true, they
assembled in their several states--and where else should they have assembled?
No political dreamer was ever wild enough to think of breaking down the lines
which separate the states, and of compounding the American people into one
common mass. Of consequence, when they act, they act in their states. But the
measures they adopt do not, on that account, cease to be the measures of the
people themselves, or become the measures of the state governments.


From these conventions, the constitution derives its whole authority. The
government proceeds directly from the people; is 'ordained and established,'
in the name of the people; and is declared to be ordained, 'in order to form a
more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, and
secure the blessings of liberty to themselves and to their posterity.' The
assent of the states, in their sovereign capacity, is implied, in calling a
convention, and thus submitting that instrument to the people. But the people
were at perfect liberty to accept or reject it; and their act was final. It
required not the affirmance, and could not be negatived, by the state
governments. The constitution, when thus adopted, was of complete obligation,
and bound the state sovereignties.

It has been said, that the people had already surrendered all their powers to
the state sovereignties, and had nothing more to give. But, surely, the
question whether they may resume and modify the powers granted to government,
does not remain to be settled in this country. Much more might the legitimacy
of the general government be doubted, had it been created by the states. The
powers delegated to the state sovereignties were to be exercised by
themselves, not by a distinct and independent sovereignty, created by
themselves. To the formation of a league, such as was the confederation, the
state sovereignties were certainly competent. But when, 'in order to form a
more perfect union,' it was deemed necessary to change this alliance into an
effective government, possessing great and sovereign powers, and acting
directly on the people, the necessity of referring it to the people, and of
deriving its powers directly from them, was felt and acknowledged by all. The
government of the Union, then (whatever may be the influence of this fact on
the case), is, emphatically and truly, a government of the people. In form,
and in substance, it emanates from them. Its powers are granted by them, and
are to be exercised directly on them, and for their benefit.

This government is acknowledged by all, to be one of enumerated powers. The
principle, that it can exercise only the powers granted to it, would seem too
apparent, to have required to be enforced by all those arguments, which its
enlightened friends, while it was depending before the people, found it
necessary to urge; that principle is now universally admitted. But the
question respecting the extent of the powers actually granted, is perpetually
arising, and will probably continue to arise, so long as our system shall
exist. In discussing these questions, the conflicting powers of the general
and state governments must be brought into view, and the supremacy of their
respective laws, when they are in opposition, must be settled.

If any one proposition could command the universal assent of mankind, we might
expect it would be this--that the government of the Union, though limited in
its powers, is supreme within its sphere of action. This would seem to result,
necessarily, from its nature. It is the government of all; its powers are
delegated by all; it represents all, and acts for all. Though any one state
may be willing to control its operations, no state is willing to allow others
to control them. The nation, on those subjects on which it can act, must
necessarily bind its component parts. But this question is not left to mere
reason: the people have, in express terms, decided it, by saying, 'this
constitution, and the laws of the United States, which shall be made in
pursuance thereof,' 'shall be the supreme law of the land,' and by requiring
that the members of the state legislatures, and the officers of the executive
and judicial departments of the states, shall take the oath of fidelity to it.
The government of the United States, then, though limited in its powers, is
supreme; and its laws, when made in pursuance of the constitution, form the
supreme law of the land, 'anything in the constitution or laws of any state to
the contrary notwithstanding.'

Among the enumerated powers, we do not find that of establishing a bank or
creating a corporation. But there is no phrase in the instrument which, like
the articles of confederation, excludes incidental or implied powers; and
which requires that everything granted shall be expressly and minutely
described. Even the 10th amendment, which was framed for the purpose of
quieting the excessive jealousies which had been excited, omits the word
'expressly,' and declares only, that the powers 'not delegated to the United
States, nor prohibited to the states, are reserved to the states or to the
people;' thus leaving the question, whether the particular power which may
become the subject of contest, has been delegated to the one government, or
prohibited to the other, to depend on a fair construction of the whole
instrument. The men who drew and adopted this amendment had experienced the
embarrassments resulting from the insertion of this word in the articles of
confederation, and probably omitted it, to avoid those embarrassments. A
constitution, to contain an accurate detail of all the subdivisions of which
its great powers will admit, and of all the means by which they may be carried
into execution, would partake of the prolixity of a legal code, and could
scarcely be embraced by the human mind. It would, probably, never be
understood by the public. Its nature, therefore, requires, that only its great
outlines should be marked, its important objects designated, and the minor
ingredients which compose those objects, be deduced from the nature of the
objects themselves. That this idea was entertained by the framers of the
American constitution, is not only to be inferred from the nature of the
instrument, but from the language. Why else were some of the limitations,
found in the 9th section of the 1st article, introduced? It is also, in some
degree, warranted, by their having omitted to use any restrictive term which
might prevent its receiving a fair and just interpretation. In considering
this question, then, we must never forget that it is a constitution we are
expounding.

Although, among the enumerated powers of government, we do not find the word
'bank' or 'incorporation,' we find the great powers, to lay and collect taxes;
to borrow money; to regulate commerce; to declare and conduct a war; and to
raise and support armies and navies. The sword and the purse, all the external
relations, and no inconsiderable portion of the industry of the nation, are
intrusted to its government. It can never be pretended, that these vast powers
draw after them others of inferior importance, merely because they are
inferior. Such an idea can never be advanced. But it may with great reason be
contended, that a government, intrusted with such ample powers, on the due
execution of which the happiness and prosperity of the nation so vitally
depends, must also be intrusted with ample means for their execution. The
power being given, it is the interest of the nation to facilitate its
execution. It can never be their interest, and cannot be presumed to have been
their intention, to clog and embarrass its execution, by withholding the most
appropriate means. Throughout this vast republic, from the St. Croix to the
Gulf of Mexico, from the Atlantic to the Pacific, revenue is to be collected
and expended, armies are to be marched and supported. The exigencies of the
nation may require, that the treasure raised in the north should be
transported to the south, that raised in the east, conveyed to the west, or
that this order should be reversed. Is that construction of the constitution
to be preferred, which would render these operations difficult, hazardous and
expensive? Can we adopt that construction (unless the words imperiously
require it), which would impute to the framers of that instrument, when
granting these powers for the public good, the intention of impeding their
exercise, by withholding a choice of means? If, indeed, such be the mandate of
the constitution, we have only to obey; but that instrument does not profess
to enumerate the means by which the powers it confers may be executed; nor
does it prohibit the creation of a corporation, if the existence of such a
being be essential, to the beneficial exercise of those powers. It is, then,
the subject of fair inquiry, how far such means may be employed.

It is not denied, that the powers given to the government imply the ordinary
means of execution. That, for example, of raising revenue, and applying it to
national purposes, is admitted to imply the power of conveying money from
place to place, as the exigencies of the nation may require, and of employing
the usual means of conveyance. But it is denied, that the government has its
choice of means; or, that it may employ the most convenient means, if, to
employ them, it be necessary to erect a corporation. On what foundation does
this argument rest? On this alone: the power of creating a corporation, is one
appertaining to sovereignty, and is not expressly conferred on congress. This
is true. But all legislative powers appertain to sovereignty. The original
power of giving the law on any subject whatever, is a sovereign power; and if
the government of the Union is restrained from creating a corporation, as a
means for performing its functions, on the single reason that the creation of
a corporation is an act of sovereignty; if the sufficiency of this reason be
acknowledged, there would be some difficulty in sustaining the authority of
congress to pass other laws for the accomplishment of the same objects. The
government which has a right to do an act, and has imposed on it, the duty of
performing that act, must, according to the dictates of reason, be allowed to
select the means; and those who contend that it may not select any appropriate
means, that one particular mode of effecting the object is excepted, take upon
themselves the burden of establishing that exception.


The creation of a corporation, it is said, appertains to sovereignty. This is
admitted. But to what portion of sovereignty does it appertain? Does it belong
to one more than to another? In America, the powers of sovereignty are divided
between the government of the Union, and those of the states. They are each
sovereign, with respect to the objects committed to it, and neither sovereign,
with respect to the objects committed to the other. We cannot comprehend that
train of reasoning, which would maintain, that the extent of power granted by
the people is to be ascertained, not by the nature and terms of the grant, but
by its date. Some state constitutions were formed before, some since that of
the United States. We cannot believe, that their relation to each other is in
any degree dependent upon this circumstance. Their respective powers must, we
think, be precisely the same, as if they had been formed at the same time. Had
they been formed at the same time, and had the people conferred on the general
government the power contained in the constitution, and on the states the
whole residuum of power, would it have been asserted, that the government of
the Union was not sovereign, with respect to those objects which were
intrusted to it, in relation to which its laws were declared to be supreme? If
this could not have been asserted, we cannot well comprehend the process of
reasoning which maintains, that a power appertaining to sovereignty cannot be
connected with that vast portion of it which is granted to the general
government, so far as it is calculated to subserve the legitimate objects of
that government. The power of creating a corporation, though appertaining to
sovereignty, is not, like the power of making war, or levying taxes, or of
regulating commerce, a great substantive and independent power, which cannot
be implied as incidental to other powers, or used as a means of executing
them. It is never the end for which other powers are exercised, but a means by
which other objects are accomplished. No contributions are made to charity,
for the sake of an incorporation, but a corporation is created to administer
the charity; no seminary of learning is instituted, in order to be
incorporated, but the corporate character is conferred to subserve the
purposes of education. No city was ever built, with the sole object of being
incorporated, but is incorporated as affording the best means of being well
governed. The power of creating a corporation is never used for its own sake,
but for the purpose of effecting something else. No sufficient reason is,
therefore, perceived, why it may not pass as incidental to those powers which
are expressly given, if it be a direct mode of executing them.


But the constitution of the United States has not left the right of congress
to employ the necessary means, for the execution of the powers conferred on
the government, to general reasoning. To its enumeration of powers is added,
that of making 'all laws which shall be necessary and proper, for carrying
into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this
constitution, in the government of the United States, or in any department
thereof.' The counsel for the state of Maryland have urged various arguments,
to prove that this clause, though, in terms, a grant of power, is not so, in
effect; but is really restrictive of the general right, which might otherwise
be implied, of selecting means for executing the enumerated powers. In support
of this proposition, they have found it necessary to contend, that this clause
was inserted for the purpose of conferring on congress the power of making
laws. That, without it, doubts might be entertained, whether congress could
exercise its powers in the form of legislation.


But could this be the object for which it was inserted? A government is
created by the people, having legislative, executive and judicial powers. Its
legislative powers are vested in a congress, which is to consist of a senate
and house of representatives. Each house may determine the rule of its
proceedings; and it is declared, that every bill which shall have passed both
houses, shall, before it becomes a law, be presented to the president of the
United States. The 7th section describes the course of proceedings, by which a
bill shall become a law; and, then, the 8th section enumerates the powers of
congress. Could it be necessary to say, that a legislature should exercise
legislative powers, in the shape of legislation? After allowing each house to
prescribe its own course of proceeding, after describing the manner in which a
bill should become a law, would it have entered into the mind of a single
member of the convention, that an express power to make laws was necessary, to
enable the legislature to make them? That a legislature, endowed with
legislative powers, can legislate, is a proposition too self-evident to have
been questioned.

But the argument on which most reliance is placed, is drawn from that peculiar
language of this clause. Congress is not empowered by it to make all laws,
which may have relation to the powers confered on the government, but such
only as may be 'necessary and proper' for carrying them into execution.
The word 'necessary' is considered as controlling the whole sentence, and
as limiting the right to pass laws for the execution of the granted powers, to
such as are indispensable, and without which the power would be nugatory. That
it excludes the choice of means, and leaves to congress, in each case, that
only which is most direct and simple.

Is it true, that this is the sense in which the word 'necessary' is always
used? Does it always import an absolute physical necessity, so strong, that
one thing to which another may be termed necessary, cannot exist without that
other? We think it does not. If reference be had to its use, in the common
affairs of the world, or in approved authors, we find that it frequently
imports no more than that one thing is convenient, or useful, or essential to
another. To employ the means necessary to an end, is generally understood as
employing any means calculated to produce the end, and not as being confined
to those single means, without which the end would be entirely unattainable.
Such is the character of human language, that no word conveys to the mind, in
all situations, one single definite idea; and nothing is more common than to
use words in a figurative sense. Almost all compositions contain words, which,
taken in a their rigorous sense, would convey a meaning different from that
which is obviously intended. It is essential to just construction, that many
words which import something excessive, should be understood in a more
mitigated sense--in that sense which common usage justifies. The word
'necessary' is of this description. It has not a fixed character, peculiar to
itself. It admits of all degrees of comparison; and is often connected with
other words, which increase or diminish the impression the mind receives of
the urgency it imports. A thing may be necessary, very necessary, absolutely
or indispensably necessary. To no mind would the same idea be conveyed by
these several phrases. The comment on the word is well illustrated by the
passage cited at the bar, from the 10th section of the 1st article of the
constitution. It is, we think, impossible to compare the sentence which
prohibits a state from laying 'imposts, or duties on imports or exports,
except what may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection laws,'
with that which authorizes congress 'to make all laws which shall be necessary
and proper for carrying into execution' the powers of the general government,
without feeling a conviction, that the convention understood itself to change
materially the meaning of the word 'necessary,' by prefixing the word
'absolutely.' This word, then, like others, is used in various senses; and, in
its construction, the subject, the context, the intention of the person using
them, are all to be taken into view.

Let this be done in the case under consideration. The subject is the execution
of those great powers on which the welfare of a nation essentially depends. It
must have been the intention of those who gave these powers, to insure, so far
as human prudence could insure, their beneficial execution. This could not be
done, by confiding the choice of means to such narrow limits as not to leave
it in the power of congress to adopt any which might be appropriate, and which
were conducive to the end. This provision is made in a constitution, intended
to endure for ages to come, and consequently, to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs. To have prescribed the means by which government
should, in all future time, execute its powers, would have been to change,
entirely, the character of the instrument, and give it the properties of a
legal code. It would have been an unwise attempt to provide, by immutable
rules, for exigencies which, if foreseen at all, must have been seen dimly,
and which can be best provided for as they occur. To have declared, that the
best means shall not be used, but those alone, without which the power given
would be nugatory, would have been to deprive the legislature of the capacity
to avail itself of experience, to exercise its reason, and to accommodate its
legislation to circumstances.

If we apply this principle of construction to any of the powers of the
government, we shall find it so pernicious in its operation that we shall be
compelled to discard it. The powers vested in congress may certainly be
carried into execution, without prescribing an oath of office. The power to
exact this security for the faithful performance of duty, is not given, nor is
it indispensably necessary. The different departments may be established;
taxes may be imposed and collected; armies and navies may be raised and
maintained; and money may be borrowed, without requiring an oath of office. It
might be argued, with as much plausibility as other incidental powers have
been assailed, that the convention was not unmindful of this subject. The oath
which might be exacted--that of fidelity to the constitution--is prescribed,
and no other can be required. Yet, he would be charged with insanity, who
should contend, that the legislature might not superadd, to the oath directed
by the constitution, such other oath of office as its wisdom might suggest.

So, with respect to the whole penal code of the United States: whence arises
the power to punish, in cases not prescribed by the constitution? All admit,
that the government may, legitimately, punish any violation of its laws; and
yet, this is not among the enumerated powers of congress. The right to enforce
the observance of law, by punishing its infraction, might be denied, with the
more plausibility, because it is expressly given in some cases.


Congress is empowered 'to provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the
securities and current coin of the United States,' and 'to define and punish
piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and offences against the law
of nations.' The several powers of congress may exist, in a very imperfect
state, to be sure, but they may exist and be carried into execution, although
no punishment should be inflicted, in cases where the right to punish is not
expressly given.

Take, for example, the power 'to establish post-offices and post-roads.' This
power is executed, by the single act of making the establishment. But, from
this has been inferred the power and duty of carrying the mail along the post-
road, from one post-office to another. And from this implied power, has again
been inferred the right to punish those who steal letters from the post-
office, or rob the mail. It may be said, with some plausibility, that the
right to carry the mail, and to punish those who rob it, is not indispensably
necessary to the establishment of a post-office and post-road. This right is
indeed essential to the beneficial exercise of the power, but not
indispensably necessary to its existence. So, of the punishment of the crimes
of stealing or falsifying a record or process of a court of the United States,
or of perjury in such court. To punish these offences, is certainly conducive
to the due administration of justice. But courts may exist, and may decide the
causes brought before them, though such crimes escape punishment.

The baneful influence of this narrow construction on all the operations of the
government, and the absolute impracticability of maintaining it, without
rendering the government incompetent to its great objects, might be
illustrated by numerous examples drawn from the constitution, and from our
laws. The good sense of the public has pronounced, without hesitation, that
the power of punishment appertains to sovereignty, and may be exercised,
whenever the sovereign has a right to act, as incidental to his constitutional
powers. It is a means for carrying into execution all sovereign powers, and
may be used, although not indispensably necessary. It is a right incidental to
the power, and conducive to its beneficial exercise.

If this limited construction of the word 'necessary' must be abandoned, in
order to punish, whence is derived the rule which would reinstate it, when the
government would carry its powers into execution, by means not vindictive in
their nature? If the word 'necessary' means 'needful,' 'requisite,'
'essential,' 'conducive to,' in order to let in the power of punishment for
the infraction of law; why is it not equally comprehensive, when required to
authorize the use of means which facilitate the execution of the powers of
government, without the infliction of punishment?

In ascertaining the sense in which the word 'necessary' is used in this clause
of the constitution, we may derive some aid from that with which it it is
associated. Congress shall have power 'to make all laws which shall be
necessary and proper to carry into execution' the powers of the government. If
the word 'necessary' was used in that strict and rigorous sense for which the
counsel for the state of Maryland contend, it would be an extraordinary
departure from the usual course of the human mind, as exhibited in
composition, to add a word, the only possible offect of which is, to qualify
that strict and rigorous meaning; to present to the mind the idea of some
choice of means of legislation, not strained and compressed within the narrow
limits for which gentlemen contend.

But the argument which most conclusively demonstrates the error of the
construction contended for by the counsel for the state of Maryland, is
founded on the intention of the convention, as manifested in the whole clause.
To waste time and argument in proving that, without it, congress might carry
its powers into execution, would be not much less idle, than to hold a lighted
taper to the sun. As little can it be required to prove, that in the absence
of this clause, congress would have some choice of means. That it might employ
those which, in its judgment, would most advantageously effect the object to
be accomplished. That any means adapted to the end, any means which tended
directly to the execution of the constitutional powers of the government, were
in themselves constitutional. This clause, as construed by the state of
Maryland, would abridge, and almost annihilate, this useful and necessary
right of the legislature to select its means. That this could not be intended,
is, we should think, had it not been already controverted, too apparent for
controversy.

We think so for the following reasons: 1st. The clause is placed among the
powers of congress, not among the limitations on those powers. 2d. Its terms
purport to enlarge, not to diminish the powers vested in the government. It
purports to be an additional power, not a restriction on those already
granted. No reason has been, or can be assigned, for thus concealing an
intention to narrow the discretion of the national legislature, under words
which purport to enlarge it. The framers of the constitution wished its
adoption, and well knew that it would be endangered by its strength, not by
its weakness. Had they been capable of using language which would convey to
the eye one idea, and, after deep reflection, impress on the mind, another,
they would rather have disguised the grant of power, than its limitation. If,
then, their intention had been, by this clause, to restrain the free use of
means which might otherwise have been implied, that intention would have been
inserted in another place, and would have been expressed in terms resembling
these. 'In carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all others,' &c.,
'no laws shall be passed but such as are necessary and proper.' Had the
intention been to make this clause restrictive, it would unquestionably have
been so in form as well as in effect.

The result of the most careful and attentive consideration bestowed upon this
clause is, that if it does not enlarge, it cannot be construed to restrain the
powers of congress, or to impair the right of the legislature to exercise its
best judgment in the selection of measures to carry into execution the
constitutional powers of the government. If no other motive for its insertion
can be suggested, a sufficient one is found in the desire to remove all doubts
respecting the right to legislate on that vast mass of incidental powers which
must be involved in the constitution, if that instrument be not a splendid
bauble.


We admit, as all must admit, that the powers of the government are limited,
and that its limits are not to be transcended. But we think the sound
construction of the constitution must allow to the national legislature that
discretion, with respect to the means by which the powers it confers are to be
carried into execution, which will enable that body to perform the high duties
assigned to it, in the manner most beneficial to the people. Let the end be
legitimate, let it be within the scope of the constitution, and all means
which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end, which are not
prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the constitution, are
constitutional.

That a corporation must be considered as a means not less usual, not of higher
dignity, not more requiring a particular specification than other means, has
been sufficiently proved. If we look to the origin of corporations, to the
manner in which they have been framed in that government from which we have
derived most of our legal principles and ideas, or to the uses to which they
have been applied, we find no reason to suppose, that a constitution,
omitting, and wisely omitting, to enumerate all the means for carrying into
execution the great powers vested in government, ought to have specified this.
Had it been intended to grant this power, as one which should be distinct and
independent, to be exercised in any case whatever, it would have found a place
among the enumerated powers of the government. But being considered merely as
a means, to be employed only for the purpose of carrying into execution the
given powers, there could be no motive for particularly mentioning it.

The propriety of this remark would seem to be generally acknowledged, by the
universal acquiescence in the construction which has been uniformly put on the
3d section of the 4th article of the constitution. The power to 'make all
needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property
belonging to the United States,' is not more comprehensive, than the power 'to
make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution'
the powers of the government. Yet all admit the constitutionality of a
territorial government, which is a corporate body.

If a corporation may be employed, indiscriminately with other means, to carry
into execution the powers of the government, no particular reason can be
assigned for excluding the use of a bank, if required for its fiscal
operations. To use one, must be within the discretion of congress, if it be an
appropriate mode of executing the powers of government. That it is a
convenient, a useful, and essential instrument in the prosecution of its
fiscal operations, is not now a subject of controversy. All those who have
been concerned in the administration of our finances, have concurred in
representing its importance and necessity; and so strongly have they been
felt, that statesmen of the first class, whose previous opinions against it
had been confirmed by every circumstance which can fix the human judgment,
have yielded those opinions to the exigencies of the nation. Under the
confederation, congress, justifying the measure by its necessity, transcended,
perhaps, its powers, to obtain the advantage of a bank; and our own
legislation attests the universal conviction of the utility of this measure.
The time has passed away, when it can be necessary to enter into any
discussion, in order to prove the importance of this instrument, as a means to
effect the legitimate objects of the government.

But were its necessity less apparent, none can deny its being an appropriate
measure; and if it is, the decree of its necessity, as has been very justly
observed, is to be discsused in another place. Should congress, in the
execution of its powers, adopt measures which are prohibited by the
constitution; or should congress, under the pretext of executing its powers,
pass laws for the accomplishment of objects not intrusted to the government;
it would become the painful duty of this tribunal, should a case requiring
such a decision come before it, to say, that such an act was not the law of
the land. But where the law is not prohibited, and is really calculated to
effect any of the objects intrusted to the government, to undertake here to
inquire into the decree of its necessity, would be to pass the line which
circumscribes the judicial department, and to tread on legislative ground.
This court disclaims all pretensions to such a power.

After this declaration, it can scarcely be necessary to say, that the
existence of state banks can have no possible influence on the question. No
trace is to be found in the constitution, of an intention to create a
dependence of the government of the Union on those of the states, for the
execution of the great powers assigned to it. Its means are adequate to its
ends; and on those means alone was it expected to rely for the accomplishment
of its ends. To impose on it the necessity of resorting to means which it
cannot control, which another government may furnish or withhold, would render
its course precarious, the result of its measures uncertain, and create a
dependence on other governments, which might disappoint its most important
designs, and is incompatible with the language of the constitution. But were
it otherwise, the choice of means implies a right to choose a national bank in
preference to state banks, and congress alone can make the election.

After the most deliberate consideration, it is the unanimous and decided
opinion of this court, that the act to incorporate the Bank of the United
States is a law made in pursuance of the constitution, and is a part of the
supreme law of the land.

The branches, proceeding from the same stock, and being conducive to the
complete accomplishment of the object, are equally constitutional. It would
have been unwise, to locate them in the charter, and it would be unnecessarily
inconvenient, to employ the legislative power in making those subordinate
arrangements. The great duties of the bank are prescribed; those duties
require branches; and the bank itself may, we think, be safely trusted with
the selection of places where those branches shall be fixed; reserving always
to the government the right to require that a branch shall be located where it
may be deemed necessary.

It being the opinion of the court, that the act incorporating the bank is
constitutional; and that the power of establishing a branch in the state of
Maryland might be properly exercised by the bank itself, we proceed to
inquire----

2\. Whether the state of Maryland may, without violating the constitution, tax
that branch? That the power of taxation is one of vital importance; that it is
retained by the states; that it is not abridged by the grant of a similar
power to the government of the Union; that it is to be concurrently exercised
by the two governments--are truths which have never been denied. But such is
the paramount character of the constitution, that its capacity to withdraw any
subject from the action of even this power, is admitted. The states are
expressly forbidden to lay any duties on imports or exports, except what may
be absolutely necessary for executing their inspection laws. If the obligation
of this prohibition must be conceded--if it may restrain a state from the
exercise of its taxing power on imports and exports--the same paramount
character would seem to restrain, as it certainly may restrain, a state from
such other exercise of this power, as is in its nature incompatible with, and
repugnant to, the constitutional laws of the Union. A law, absolutely
repugnant to another, as entirely repeals that other as if express terms of
repeal were used.

On this ground, the counsel for the bank place its claim to be exempted from
the power of a state to tax its operations. There is no express provision for
the case, but the claim has been sustained on a principle which so entirely
pervades the constitution, is so intermixed with the materials which compose
it, so interwoven with its web, so blended with its texture, as to be
incapable of being separated from it, without rending it into shreds. This
great principle is, that the constitution and the laws made in pursuance
thereof are supreme; that they control the constitution and laws of the
respective states, and cannot be controlled by them. From this, which may be
almost termed an axiom, other propositions are deduced as corollaries, on the
truth or error of which, and on their application to this case, the cause has
been supposed to depend. These are, 1st. That a power to create implies a
power to preserve: 2d. That a power to destroy, if wielded by a different
hand, is hostile to, and incompatible with these powers to create and to
preserve: 3d. That where this repugnancy exists, that authority which is
supreme must control, not yield to that over which it is supreme.

These propositions, as abstract truths, would, perhaps, never be controverted.
Their application to this case, however, has been denied; and both in
maintaining the affirmative and the negative, a splendor of eloquence, and
strength of argument, seldom, if ever, surpassed, have been displayed.

The power of congress to create, and of course, to continue, the bank, was the
subject of the preceding part of this opinion; and is no longer to be
considered as questionable. That the power of taxing it by the states may be
exercised so as to destroy it, is too obvious to be denied. But taxation is
said to be an absolute power, which acknowledges no other limits than those
expressly prescribed in the constitution, and like sovereign power of every
other description, is intrusted to the discretion of those who use it. But the
very terms of this argument admit, that the sovereignty of the state, in the
article of taxation itself, is subordinate to, and may be controlled by the
constitution of the United States. How far it has been controlled by that
instrument, must be a question of construction. In making this construction,
no principle, not declared, can be admissible, which would defeat the
legitimate operations of a supreme government. It is of the very essence of
supremacy, to remove all obstacles to its action within its own sphere, and so
to modify every power vested in subordinate governments, as to exempt its own
operations from their own influence. This effect need not be stated in terms.
It is so involved in the declaration of supremacy, so necessarily implied in
it, that the expression of it could not make it more certain. We must,
therefore, keep it in view, while construing the constitution.

The argument on the part of the state of Maryland, is, not that the states may
directly resist a law of congress, but that they may exercise their
acknowledged powers upon it, and that the constitution leaves them this right,
in the confidence that they will not abuse it. Before we proceed to examine
this argument, and to subject it to test of the constitution, we must be
permitted to bestow a few considerations on the nature and extent of this
original right of taxation, which is acknowledged to remain with the states.
It is admitted, that the power of taxing the people and their property, is
essential to the very existence of government, and may be legitimately
exercised on the objects to which it is applicable, to the utmost extent to
which the government may choose to carry it. The only security against the
abuse of this power, is found in the structure of the government itself. In
imposing a tax, the legislature acts upon its constituents. This is, in
general, a sufficient security against erroneous and oppressive taxation.

The people of a state, therefore, give to their government a right of taxing
themselves and their property, and as the exigencies of government cannot be
limited, they prescribe no limits to the exercise of this right, resting
confidently on the interest of the legislator, and on the influence of the
constituent over their representative, to guard them against its abuse. But
the means employed by the government of the Union have no such security, nor
is the right of a state to tax them sustained by the same theory. Those means
are not given by the people of a particular state, not given by the
constituents of the legislature, which claim the right to tax them, but by the
people of all the states. They are given by all, for the benefit of all--and
upon theory, should be subjected to that government only which belongs to all.

It may be objected to this definition, that the power of taxation is not
confined to the people and property of a state. It may be exercised upon every
object brought within its jurisdiction. This is true. But to what source do wo
trace this right? It is obvious, that it is an incident of sovereignty, and is
co-extensive with that to which it is an incident. All subjects over which the
sovereign power of a state extends, are objects of taxation; but those over
which it does not extend, are, upon the soundest principles, exempt from
taxation. This proposition may almost be pronounced self-evident.

The sovereignty of a state extends to everything which exists by its own
authority, or is introduced by its permission; but does it extend to those
means which are employed by congress to carry into execution powers conferred
on that body by the people of the United States? We think it demonstrable,
that it does not. Those powers are not given by the people of a single state.
They are given by the people of the United States, to a government whose laws,
made in pursuance of the constitution, are declared to be supreme.
Consequently, the people of a single state cannot confer a sovereignty which
will extend over them.

If we measure the power of taxation residing in a state, by the extent of
sovereignty which the people of a single state possess, and can confer on its
government, we have an intelligible standard, applicable to every case to
which the power may be applied. We have a principle which leaves the power of
taxing the people and property of a state unimpaired; which leaves to a state
the command of all its resources, and which places beyond its reach, all those
powers which are conferred by the people of the United States on the
government of the Union, and all those means which are given for the purpose
of carrying those powers into execution. We have a principle which is safe for
the states, and safe for the Union. We are relieved, as we ought to be, from
clashing sovereignty; from interfering powers; from a repugnancy between a
right in one government to pull down, what there is an acknowledged right in
another to build up; from the incompatibility of a right in one government to
destroy, what there is a right in another to preserve. We are not driven to
the perplexing inquiry, so unfit for the judicial department, what degree of
taxation is the legitimate use, and what degree may amonnt to the abuse of the
power. The attempt to use it on the means employed by the government of the
Union, in pursuance of the constitution, is itself an abuse, because it is the
usurpation of a power which the people of a single state cannot give. We find,
then, on just theory, a total failure of this original right to tax the means
employed by the government of the Union, for the execution of its powers. The
right never existed, and the question whether it has been surrendered, cannot
arise.

But, waiving this theory for the present, let us resume the inquiry, whether
this power can be exercised by the respective states, consistently with a fair
construction of the constitution? That the power to tax involves the power to
destroy; that the power to destroy may defeat and render useless the power to
create; that there is a plain repugnance in conferring on one government a
power to control the constitutional measures of another, which other, with
respect to those very measures, is declared to be supreme over that which
exerts the control, are propositions not to be denied. But all inconsistencies
are to be reconciled by the magic of the word confidence. Taxation, it is
said, does not necessarily and unavoidably destroy. To carry it to the excess
of destruction, would be an abuse, to presume which, would banish that
confidence which is essential to all government. But is this a case of
confidence? Would the people of any one state trust those of another with a
power to control the most insignificant operations of their state government?
We know they would not. Why, then, should we suppose, that the people of any
one state should be willing to trust those of another with a power to control
the operations of a government to which they have confided their most
important and most valuable interests? In the legislature of the Union alone,
are all represented. The legislature of the Union alone, therefore, can be
trusted by the people with the power of controlling measures which concern
all, in the confidence that it will not be abused. This, then, is not a case
of confidence, and we must consider it is as it really is.

If we apply the principle for which the state of Maryland contends, to the
constitution, generally, we shall find it capable of changing totally the
character of that instrument. We shall find it capable of arresting all the
measures of the government, and of prostrating it at the foot of the states.
The American people have declared their constitution and the laws made in
pursuance thereof, to be supreme; but this principle would transfer the
supremacy, in fact, to the states. If the states may tax one instrument,
employed by the government in the execution of its powers, they may tax any
and every other instrument. They may tax the mail; they may tax the mint; they
may tax patent-rights; they may tax the papers of the custom-house; they may
tax judicial process; they may tax all the means employed by the government,
to an excess which would defeat all the ends of government. This was not
intended by the American people. They did not design to make their government
dependent on the states.

Gentlemen say, they do not claim the right to extend state taxation to these
objects. They limit their pretensions to property. But on what principle, is
this distinction made? Those who make it have furnished no reason for it, and
the principle for which they contend denies it. They contend, that the power
of taxation has no other limit than is found in the 10th section of the 1st
article of the constitution; that, with respect to everything else, the power
of the states is supreme, and admits of no control. If this be true, the
distinction between property and other subjects to which the power of taxation
is applicable, is merely arbitrary, and can never be sustained. This is not
all. If the controlling power of the states be established; if their supremacy
as to taxation be acknowledged; what is to restrain their exercising control
in any shape they may please to give it? Their sovereignty is not confined to
taxation; that is not the only mode in which it might be displayed. The
question is, in truth, a question of supremacy; and if the right of the states
to tax the means employed by the general government be conceded, the
declaration that the constitution, and the laws made in pursuance thereof,
shall be the supreme law of the land, is empty and unmeaning declamation.

In the course of the argument, the Federalist has been quoted; and the
opinions expressed by the authors of that work have been justly supposed to be
entitled to great respect in expounding the constitution. No tribute can be
paid to them which exceeds their merit; but in applying their opinions to the
cases which may arise in the progress of our government, a right to judge of
their correctness must be retained; and to understand the argument, we must
examine the proposition it maintains, and the objections against which it is
directed. The subject of those numbers, from which passages have been cited,
is the unlimited power of taxation which is vested in the general government.
The objection to this unlimited power, which the argument seeks to remove, is
stated with fulness and clearness. It is, 'that an indefinite power of
taxation in the latter (the government of the Union) might, and probably
would, in time, deprive the former (the government of the states) of the means
of providing for their own necessities; and would subject them entirely to the
mercy of the national legislature. As the laws of the Union are to become the
supreme law of the land; as it is to have power to pass all laws that may be
necessary for carrying into execution the authorities with which it is
proposed to vest it; the national government might, at any time, abolish the
taxes imposed for state objects, upon the pretence of an interference with its
own. It might allege a necessity for doing this, in order to give efficacy to
the national revenues; and thus, all the resources of taxation might, by
degrees, become the subjects of federal monopoly, to the entire exclusion and
destruction of the state governments.'

The objections to the constitution which are noticed in these numbers, were to
the undefined power of the government to tax, not to the incidental privilege
of exempting its own measures from state taxation. The consequences
apprehended from this undefined power were, that it would absorb all the
objects of taxation, 'to the exclusion and destruction of the state
governments.' The arguments of the Federalist are intended to prove the
fallacy of these apprehensions; not to prove that the government was incapable
of executing any of its powers, without exposing the means it employed to the
embarrassments of state taxation. Arguments urged against these objections,
and these apprehensions, are to be understood as relating to the points they
mean to prove. Had the authors of those excellent essays been asked, whether
they contended for that construction of the constitution, which would place
within the reach of the states those measures which the government might adopt
for the execution of its powers; no man, who has read their instructive pages,
will hesitate to admit, that their answer must have been in the negative.

It has also been insisted, that, as the power of taxation in the general and
state governments is acknowledged to be concurrent, every argument which would
sustain the right of the general government to tax banks chartered by the
states, will equally sustain the right of the states to tax banks chartered by
the general government. But the two cases are not on the same reason. The
people of all the states have created the general government, and have
conferred upon it the general power of taxation. The people of all the states,
and the states themselves, are represented in congress, and, by their
representatives, exercise this power. When they tax the chartered institutions
of the states, they tax their constituents; and these taxes must be uniform.
But when a state taxes the operations of the government of the United States,
it acts upon institutions created, not by their own constituents, but by
people over whom they claim no control. It acts upon the measures of a
government created by others as well as themselves, for the benefit of others
in common with themselves. The difference is that which always exists, and
always must exist, between the action of the whole on a part, and the action
of a part on the whole--between the laws of a government declared to be
supreme, and those of a government which, when in opposition to those laws, is
not supreme.

But if the full application of this argument could be admitted, it might bring
into question the right of congress to tax the state banks, and could not
prove the rights of the states to tax the Bank of the United States.

The court has bestowed on this subject its most deliberate consideration. The
result is a conviction that the states have no power, by taxation or
otherwise, to retard, impede, burden, or in any manner control, the operations
of the constitutional laws enacted by congress to carry into execution the
powers vested in the general government. This is, we think, the unavoidable
consequence of that supremacy which the constitution has declared. We are
unanimously of opinion, that the law passed by the legislature of Maryland,
imposing a tax on the Bank of the United States, is unconstitutional and void.

This opinion does not deprive the states of any resources which they
originally possessed. It does not extend to a tax paid by the real property of
the bank, in common with the other real property within the state, nor to a
tax imposed on the interest which the citizens of Maryland may hold in this
institution, in common with other property of the same description throughout
the state. But this is a tax on the operations of the bank, and is,
consequently, a tax on the operation of an instrument employed by the
government of the Union to carry its powers into execution. Such a tax must be
unconstitutional.

\newpage
