Wickard v. Filburn

317 U.S. 111 (1942)

**Mr. Justice JACKSON delivered the opinion of the Court.**

The appellee filed his complaint against the Secretary of Agriculture of the
United States, three members of the County Agricultural Conservation Committee
for Montgomery County, Ohio, and a member of the State Agricultural
Conservation Committee for Ohio. He sought to enjoin enforcement against
himself of the marketing penalty imposed by the amendment of May 26, 1941, to
the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938, upon that part of his 1941 wheat
crop which was available for marketing in excess of the marketing quota
established for his farm. He also sought a declaratory judgment that the wheat
marketing quota provisions of the Act as amended and applicable to him were
unconstitutional because not sustainable under the Commerce Clause or
consistent with the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.

The appellee for many years past has owned and operated a small farm in
Montgomery County, Ohio, maintaining a herd of dairy cattle, selling milk,
raising poultry, and selling poultry and eggs. It has been his practice to
raise a small acreage of winter wheat, sown in the Fall and harvested in the
following July; to sell a portion of the crop; to feed part to poultry and
livestock on the farm, some of which is sold; to use some in making flour for
home consumption; and to keep the rest for the following seeding. The intended
disposition of the crop here involved has not been expressly stated.

In July of 1940, pursuant to the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938, as then
amended, there were established for the appellee's 1941 crop a wheat acreage
allotment of 11.1 acres and a normal yield of 20.1 bushels of wheat an acre.
He was given notice of such allotment in July of 1940 before the Fall planting
of his 1941 crop of wheat, and again in July of 1941, before it was harvested.
He sowed, however, 23 acres, and harvested from his 11.9 acres of excess
acreage 239 bushels, which under the terms of the Act as amended on May 26,
1941, constituted farm marketing excess, subject to a penalty of 49 cents a
bushel, or $117.11 in all. The appellee has not paid the penalty and he has
not postponed or avoided it by storing the excess under regulations of the
Secretary of Agriculture, or by delivering it up to the Secretary. The
Committee, therefore, refused him a marketing card, which was, under the terms
of Regulations promulgated by the Secretary, necessary to protect a buyer from
liability to the penalty and upon its protecting lien.

The general scheme of the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938 as related to
wheat is to control the volume moving in interstate and foreign commerce in
order to avoid surpluses and shortages and the consequent abnormally low or
high wheat prices and obstructions to commerce. Within prescribed limits and
by prescribed standards the Secretary of Agriculture is directed to ascertain
and proclaim each year a national acreage allotment for the next crop of
wheat, which is then apportioned to the states and their counties, and is
eventually broken up into allotments for individual farms. Loans and payments
to wheat farmers are authorized in stated circumstances.


It is urged that under the Commerce Clause of the Constitution, Article I, ยง
8, clause 3, Congress does not possess the power it has in this instance
sought to exercise. The question would merit little consideration since our
decision in United States v. Darby sustaining the federal power to regulate production of
goods for commerce except for the fact that this Act extends federal
regulation to production not intended in any part for commerce but wholly for
consumption on the farm. The Act includes a definition of 'market' and its
derivatives so that as related to wheat in addition to its conventional
meaning it also means to dispose of 'by feeding (in any form) to poultry or
livestock which, or the products of which, are sold, bartered, or exchanged,
or to be so disposed of.' Hence, marketing quotas not only embrace all that
may be sold without penalty but also what may be consumed on the premises.
Wheat produced on excess acreage is designated as 'available for marketing' as
so defined and the penalty is imposed thereon. Penalties do not depend upon
whether any part of the wheat either within or without the quota is sold or
intended to be sold. The sum of this is that the Federal Government fixes a
quota including all that the farmer may harvest for sale or for his own farm
needs, and declares that wheat produced on excess acreage may neither be
disposed of nor used except upon payment of the penalty or except it is stored
as required by the Act or delivered to the Secretary of Agriculture.

Appellee says that this is a regulation of production and consumption of
wheat. Such activities are, he urges, beyond the reach of Congressional power
under the Commerce Clause, since they are local in character, and their
effects upon interstate commerce are at most 'indirect.' In answer the
Government argues that the statute regulates neither production nor
consumption, but only marketing; and, in the alternative, that if the Act does
go beyond the regulation of marketing it is sustainable as a 'necessary and
proper' implementation of the power of Congress over interstate commerce.

The Court's recognition of the relevance of the economic effects in the
application of the Commerce Clause exemplified by this statement has made the
mechanical application of legal formulas no longer feasible. Once an economic
measure of the reach of the power granted to Congress in the Commerce Clause
is accepted, questions of federal power cannot be decided simply by finding
the activity in question to be 'production' nor can consideration of its
economic effects be foreclosed by calling them 'indirect.' The present Chief
Justice has said in summary of the present state of the law: 'The commerce
power is not confined in its exercise to the regulation of commerce among the
states. It extends to those activities intrastate which so affect interstate
commerce, or the exertion of the power of Congress over it, as to make
regulation of them appropriate means to the attainment of a legitimate end,
the effective execution of the granted power to regulate interstate commerce.
 The power of Congress over interstate commerce is plenary and complete
in itself, may be exercised to its utmost extent, and acknowledges no
limitations other than are prescribed in the Constitution.  It follows
that no form of state activity can constitutionally thwart the regulatory
power granted by the commerce clause to Congress. Hence the reach of that
power extends to those intrastate activities which in a substantial way
interfere with or obstruct the exercise of the granted power.' 

Whether the subject of the regulation in question was 'production,'
'consumption,' or 'marketing' is, therefore, not material for purposes of
deciding the question of federal power before us. That an activity is of local
character may help in a doubtful case to determine whether Congress intended
to reach it. The same consideration might help in determining whether in the
absence of Congressional action it would be permissible for the state to exert
its power on the subject matter, even though in so doing it to some degree
affected interstate commerce. But even if appellee's activity be local and
though it may not be regarded as commerce, it may still, whatever its nature,
be reached by Congress if it exerts a substantial economic effect on
interstate commerce and this irrespective of whether such effect is what might
at some earlier time have been defined as 'direct' or 'indirect.'

The parties have stipulated a summary of the economics of the wheat industry.
Commerce among the states in wheat is large and important. Although wheat is
raised in every state but one, production in most states is not equal to
consumption. Sixteen states on average have had a surplus of wheat above their
own requirements for feed, seed, and food. Thirty-two states and the District
of Columbia, where production has been below consumption, have looked to these
surplus-producing states for their supply as well as for wheat for export and
carryover.

The wheat industry has been a problem industry for some years. Largely as a
result of increased foreign production and import restrictions, annual exports
of wheat and flour from the United States during the ten-year period ending in
1940 averaged less than 10 per cent of total production, while during the
1920's they averaged more than 25 per cent. The decline in the export trade
has left a large surplus in production which in connection with an abnormally
large supply of wheat and other grains in recent years caused congestion in a
number of markets; tied up railroad cars; and caused elevators in some
instances to turn away grains, and railroads to institute embargoes to prevent
further congestion.

Many countries, both importing and exporting, have sought to modify the impact
of the world market conditions on their own economy. Importing countries have
taken measures to stimulate production and self-sufficiency. The four large
exporting countries of Argentina, Australia, Canada, and the United States
have all undertaken various programs for the relief of growers. Such measures
have been designed in part at least to protect the domestic price received by
producers. Such plans have generally evolved towards control by the central
government.


In the absence of regulation the price of wheat in the United States would be
much affected by world conditions. During 1941 producers who cooperated with
the Agricultural Adjustment program received an average price on the farm of
about $1.16 a bushel as compared with the world market price of 40 cents a
bushel.


The effect of consumption of homegrown wheat on interstate commerce is due to
the fact that it constitutes the most variable factor in the disappearance of
the wheat crop. Consumption on the farm where grown appears to vary in an
amount greater than 20 per cent of average production. The total amount of
wheat consumed as food varies but relatively little, and use as seed is
relatively constant.

The maintenance by government regulation of a price for wheat undoubtedly can
be accomplished as effectively by sustaining or increasing the demand as by
limiting the supply. The effect of the statute before us is to restrict the
amount which may be produced for market and the extent as well to which one
may forestall resort to the market by producing to meet his own needs. That
appellee's own contribution to the demand for wheat may be trivial by itself
is not enough to remove him from the scope of federal regulation where, as
here, his contribution, taken together with that of many others similarly
situated, is far from trivial. 

It is well established by decisions of this Court that the power to regulate
commerce includes the power to regulate the prices at which commodities in
that commerce are dealt in and practices affecting such prices. One of the
primary purposes of the Act in question was to increase the market price of
wheat and to that end to limit the volume thereof that could affect the
market. It can hardly be denied that a factor of such volume and variability
as home-consumed wheat would have a substantial influence on price and market
conditions. This may arise because being in marketable condition such wheat
overhangs the market and if induced by rising prices tends to flow into the
market and check price increases. But if we assume that it is never marketed,
it supplies a need of the man who grew it which would otherwise be reflected
by purchases in the open market. Home-grown wheat in this sense competes with
wheat in commerce. The stimulation of commerce is a use of the regulatory
function quite as definitely as prohibitions or restrictions thereon. This
record leaves us in no doubt that Congress may properly have considered that
wheat consumed on the farm where grown if wholly outside the scheme of
regulation would have a substantial effect in defeating and obstructing its
purpose to stimulate trade therein at increased prices.

It is said, however, that this Act, forcing some farmers into the market to
buy what they could provide for themselves, is an unfair promotion of the
markets and prices of specializing wheat growers. It is of the essence of
regulation that it lays a restraining hand on the selfinterest of the
regulated and that advantages from the regulation commonly fall to others. The
conflicts of economic interest between the regulated and those who advantage
by it are wisely left under our system to resolution by the Congress under its
more flexible and responsible legislative process. Such conflicts rarely
lend themselves to judicial determination. And with the wisdom, workability,
or fairness, of the plan of regulation we have nothing to do.


\newpage

