505 U.S. 144

112 S.Ct. 2408

120 L.Ed.2d 120

NEW YORK, Petitioner,  
v.  
UNITED STATES et al. COUNTY OF ALLEGANY, NEW YORK, Petitioner, v. UNITED
STATES. COUNTY OF CORTLAND, NEW YORK, Petitioner, v. UNITED STATES et al.

Nos. 91-543, 91-558 and 90-563.

Argued March 30, 1992.

Decided June 19, 1992.

_Syllabus_

Faced with a looming shortage of disposal sites for low level radioactive
waste in 31 States, Congress enacted the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy
Amendments Act of 1985, which, among other things, imposes upon States, either
alone or in "regional compacts" with other States, the obligation to provide
for the disposal of waste generated within their borders, and contains three
provisions setting forth "incentives" to States to comply with that
obligation. The first set of incentives--the monetary incentives--works in
three steps: (1) States with disposal sites are authorized to impose a
surcharge on radioactive waste received from other States; (2) the Secretary
of Energy collects a portion of this surcharge and places it in an escrow
account; and (3) States achieving a series of milestones in developing sites
receive portions of this fund. The second set of incentives--the access
incentives--authorizes sited States and regional compacts gradually to
increase the cost of access to their sites, and then to deny access
altogether, to waste generated in States that do not meet federal deadlines.
The so-called third "incentive"--the take title provision--specifies that a
State or regional compact that fails to provide for the disposal of all
internally generated waste by a particular date must, upon the request of the
waste's generator or owner, take title to and possession of the waste and
become liable for all damages suffered by the generator or owner as a result
of the State's failure to promptly take possession. Petitioners, New York
State and two of its counties, filed this suit against the United States,
seeking a declaratory judgment that, _inter alia,_ the three incentives
provisions are inconsistent with the Tenth Amendment--which declares that
"powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited
by it to the States, are reserved to the States"--and with the Guarantee
Clause of Article IV, ยง 4--which directs the United States to "guarantee to
every State . . . a Republican Form of Government." The District Court
dismissed the complaint, and the Court of Appeals affirmed.

_Held:_

1\. The Act's monetary incentives and access incentives provisions are
consistent with the Constitution's allocation of power between the Federal and
State Governments, but the take title provision is not. Pp. 155-183.

(a) In ascertaining whether any of the challenged provisions oversteps the
boundary between federal and state power, the Court must determine whether it
is authorized by the affirmative grants to Congress contained in Article I's
Commerce and Spending Clauses or whether it invades the province of state
sovereignty reserved by the Tenth Amendment. Pp. 155-159.

(b) Although regulation of the interstate market in the disposal of low level
radioactive waste is well within Congress' Commerce Clause authority, cf.
_Philadelphia v. New Jersey,_ 437 U.S. 617, 621-623, 98 S.Ct. 2531, 2534-2535,
57 L.Ed.2d 475 and Congress could, if it wished, pre-empt entirely state
regulation in this area, a review of this Court's decisions, see, _e.g., Hodel
v. Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation Assn., Inc.,_ 452 U.S. 264, 288, 101
S.Ct. 2352, 2366, 69 L.Ed.2d 1, and the history of the Constitutional
Convention, demonstrates that Congress may not commandeer the States'
legislative processes by directly compelling them to enact and enforce a
federal regulatory program, but must exercise legislative authority directly
upon individuals. Pp. 159-166.

(c) Nevertheless, there are a variety of methods, short of outright coercion,
by which Congress may urge a State to adopt a legislative program consistent
with federal interests. As relevant here, Congress may, under its spending
power, attach conditions on the receipt of federal funds, so long as such
conditions meet four requirements. See, _e.g., South Dakota v. Dole,_ 483 U.S.
203, 206-208, and n. 3, 107 S.Ct. 2793, 2795-2797, and n. 3, 97 L.Ed.2d 171.
Moreover, where Congress has the authority to regulate private activity under
the Commerce Clause, it may, as part of a program of "cooperative federalism,"
offer States the choice of regulating that activity according to federal
standards or having state law pre-empted by federal regulation. See, _e.g.,
Hodel, supra,_ 452 U.S., at 288, 289, 101 S.Ct., at 2366, 2367. Pp. 166-169.

(d) This Court declines petitioners' invitation to construe the Act's
provision obligating the States to dispose of their radioactive wastes as a
separate mandate to regulate according to Congress' instructions. That would
upset the usual constitutional balance of federal and state powers, whereas
the constitutional problem is avoided by construing the Act as a whole to
comprise three sets of incentives to the States. Pp. 169-170.

(e) The Act's monetary incentives are well within Congress' Commerce and
Spending Clause authority and thus are not inconsistent with the Tenth
Amendment. The authorization to sited States to impose surcharges is an
unexceptionable exercise of Congress' power to enable the States to burden
interstate commerce. The Secretary's collection of a percentage of the
surcharge is no more than a federal tax on interstate commerce, which
petitioners do not claim to be an invalid exercise of either Congress'
commerce or taxing power. Finally, in conditioning the States' receipt of
federal funds upon their achieving specified milestones, Congress has not
exceeded its Spending Clause authority in any of the four respects identified
by this Court in _Dole, supra,_ 483 U.S., at 207-208, 107 S.Ct., at 2796.
Petitioners' objection to the _form_ of the expenditures as nonfederal is
unavailing, since the Spending Clause has never been construed to deprive
Congress of the power to collect money in a segregated trust fund and spend it
for a particular purpose, and since the States' ability largely to control
whether they will pay into the escrow account or receive a share was expressly
provided by Congress as a method of encouraging them to regulate according to
the federal plan. Pp. 171-173.

(f) The Act's access incentives constitute a conditional exercise of Congress'
commerce power along the lines of that approved in _Hodel, supra,_ 452 U.S.,
at 288, 101 S.Ct., at 2366, and thus do not intrude on the States' Tenth
Amendment sovereignty. These incentives present nonsited States with the
choice either of regulating waste disposal according to federal standards or
having their waste-producing residents denied access to disposal sites. They
are not compelled to regulate, expend any funds, or participate in any federal
program, and they may continue to regulate waste in their own way if they do
not accede to federal direction. Pp. 173-174.

(g) Because the Act's take title provision offers the States a "choice"
between the two unconstitutionally coercive alternatives--either accepting
ownership of waste or regulating according to Congress' instructions--the
provision lies outside Congress' enumerated powers and is inconsistent with
the Tenth Amendment. On the one hand, either forcing the transfer of waste
from generators to the States or requiring the States to become liable for the
generators' damages would "commandeer" States into the service of federal
regulatory purposes. On the other hand, requiring the States to regulate
pursuant to Congress' direction would present a simple unconstitutional
command to implement legislation enacted by Congress. Thus, the States'
"choice" is no choice at all. Pp. 174-177.

(h) The United States' alternative arguments purporting to find limited
circumstances in which congressional compulsion of state regulation is
constitutionally permissible--that such compulsion is justified where the
federal interest is sufficiently important; that the Constitution does, in
some circumstances, permit federal directives to state governments; and that
the Constitution endows Congress with the power to arbitrate disputes between
States in interstate commerce--are rejected. Pp. 177-180.

(i) Also rejected is the sited state respondents' argument that the Act cannot
be ruled an unconstitutional infringement of New York sovereignty because
officials of that State lent their support, and consented, to the Act's
passage. A departure from the Constitution's plan for the intergovernmental
allocation of authority cannot be ratified by the "consent" of state
officials, since the Constitution protects state sovereignty for the benefit
of individuals, not States or their governments, and since the officials'
interests may not coincide with the Constitution's allocation. Nor does New
York's prior support estop it from asserting the Act's unconstitutionality.
Pp. 180-183.

(j) Even assuming that the Guarantee Clause provides a basis upon which a
State or its subdivisions may sue to enjoin the enforcement of a federal
statute, petitioners have not made out a claim that the Act's money incentives
and access incentives provisions are inconsistent with that Clause. Neither
the threat of loss of federal funds nor the possibility that the State's waste
producers may find themselves excluded from other States' disposal sites can
reasonably be said to deny New York a republican form of government. Pp.
183-186.

2\. The take title provision is severable from the rest of the Act, since
severance will not prevent the operation of the rest of the Act or defeat its
purpose of encouraging the States to attain local or regional self-sufficiency
in low level radioactive waste disposal; since the Act still includes two
incentives to encourage States along this road; since a State whose waste
generators are unable to gain access to out-of-state disposal sites may
encounter considerable internal pressure to provide for disposal, even without
the prospect of taking title; and since any burden caused by New York's
failure to secure a site will not be borne by other States' residents because
the sited regional compacts need not accept New York's waste after the final
transition period. Pp. 186-187.

942 F.2d 114 (CA5 1991), affirmed in part and reversed in part.

O'CONNOR, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which REHNQUIST, C.J.,
and SCALIA, KENNEDY, SOUTER, and THOMAS, JJ., joined, and in Parts III-A and
III-B of which WHITE, BLACKMUN, and STEVENS, JJ., joined. WHITE, J., filed an
opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part, in which BLACKMUN and
STEVENS, JJ., joined. STEVENS, J., filed an opinion concurring in part and
dissenting in part.

Peter H. Schiff, Albany, N.Y., for petitioners.

Lawrence G. Wallace, Washington, D.C., for the federal respondent.

William B. Collins, Buffalo, N.Y., for the state respondents.

Justice O'CONNOR delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

This case implicates one of our Nation's newest problems of public policy and
perhaps our oldest question of constitutional law. The public policy issue
involves the disposal of radioactive waste: In this case, we address the
constitutionality of three provisions of the Low-Level Radioactive Waste
Policy Amendments Act of 1985, Pub.L. 99-240, 99 Stat. 1842, 42 U.S.C. ยง 2021b
_et seq._ The constitutional question is as old as the Constitution: It
consists of discerning the proper division of authority between the Federal
Government and the States. We conclude that while Congress has substantial
power under the Constitution to encourage the States to provide for the
disposal of the radioactive waste generated within their borders, the
Constitution does not confer upon Congress the ability simply to compel the
States to do so. We therefore find that only two of the Act's three provisions
at issue are consistent with the Constitution's allocation of power to the
Federal Government.

2

* We live in a world full of low level radioactive waste. Radioactive material is present in luminous watch dials, smoke alarms, measurement devices, medical fluids, research materials, and the protective gear and construction materials used by workers at nuclear power plants. Low level radioactive waste is generated by the Government, by hospitals, by research institutions, and by various industries. The waste must be isolated from humans for long periods of time, often for hundreds of years. Millions of cubic feet of low level radioactive waste must be disposed of each year. See App. 110a-111a; Berkovitz, Waste Wars: Did Congress "Nuke" State Sovereignty in the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments Act of 1985?, 11 Harv.Envtl.L.Rev. 437, 439-440 (1987).

3

Our Nation's first site for the land disposal of commercial low level
radioactive waste opened in 1962 in Beatty, Nevada. Five more sites opened in
the following decade: Maxey Flats, Kentucky (1963), West Valley, New York
(1963), Hanford, Washington (1965), Sheffield, Illinois (1967), and Barnwell,
South Carolina (1971). Between 1975 and 1978, the Illinois site closed because
it was full, and water management problems caused the closure of the sites in
Kentucky and New York. As a result, since 1979 only three disposal sites--
those in Nevada, Washington, and South Carolina--have been in operation. Waste
generated in the rest of the country must be shipped to one of these three
sites for disposal. See Low-Level Radioactive Waste Regulation 39-40 (M. Burns
ed. 1988).

4

In 1979, both the Washington and Nevada sites were forced to shut down
temporarily, leaving South Carolina to shoulder the responsibility of storing
low level radioactive waste produced in every part of the country. The
Governor of South Carolina, understandably perturbed, ordered a 50% reduction
in the quantity of waste accepted at the Barnwell site. The Governors of
Washington and Nevada announced plans to shut their sites permanently. App.
142a, 152a.

5

Faced with the possibility that the Nation would be left with no disposal
sites for low level radioactive waste, Congress responded by enacting the Low-
Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act, Pub.L. 96-573, 94 Stat. 3347. Relying
largely on a report submitted by the National Governors' Association, see App.
105a-141a, Congress declared a federal policy of holding each State
"responsible for providing for the availability of capacity either within or
outside the State for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste generated
within its borders," and found that such waste could be disposed of "most
safely and efficiently . . . on a regional basis." ยง 4(a)(1), 94 Stat. 3348.
The 1980 Act authorized States to enter into regional compacts that, once
ratified by Congress, would have the authority beginning in 1986 to restrict
the use of their disposal facilities to waste generated within member States.
ยง 4(a)(2)(B), 94 Stat. 3348. The 1980 Act included no penalties for States
that failed to participate in this plan.

6

By 1985, only three approved regional compacts had operational disposal
facilities; not surprisingly, these were the compacts formed around South
Carolina, Nevada, and Washington, the three sited States. The following year,
the 1980 Act would have given these three compacts the ability to exclude
waste from nonmembers, and the remaining 31 States would have had no assured
outlet for their low level radioactive waste. With this prospect looming,
Congress once again took up the issue of waste disposal. The result was the
legislation challenged here, the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments
Act of 1985.

7

The 1985 Act was again based largely on a proposal submitted by the National
Governors' Association. In broad outline, the Act embodies a compromise among
the sited and unsited States. The sited States agreed to extend for seven
years the period in which they would accept low level radioactive waste from
other States. In exchange, the unsited States agreed to end their reliance on
the sited States by 1992.

8

The mechanics of this compromise are intricate. The Act directs: "Each State
shall be responsible for providing, either by itself or in cooperation with
other States, for the disposal of . . . low-level radioactive waste generated
within the State," 42 U.S.C. ยง 2021c(a)(1)(A), with the exception of certain
waste generated by the Federal Government, ยงยง 2021c(a)(1)(B), 2021c(b). The
Act authorizes States to "enter into such [interstate] compacts as may be
necessary to provide for the establishment and operation of regional disposal
facilities for low-level radioactive waste." ยง 2021d(a)(2). For an additional
seven years beyond the period contemplated by the 1980 Act, from the beginning
of 1986 through the end of 1992, the three existing disposal sites "shall make
disposal capacity available for low-level radioactive waste generated by any
source," with certain exceptions not relevant here. ยง 2021e(a)(2). But the
three States in which the disposal sites are located are permitted to exact a
graduated surcharge for waste arriving from outside the regional compact--in
1986-1987, $10 per cubic foot; in 1988-1989, $20 per cubic foot; and in
1990-1992, $40 per cubic foot. ยง 2021e(d)(1). After the seven-year transition
period expires, approved regional compacts may exclude radioactive waste
generated outside the region. ยง 2021d(c).

9

The Act provides three types of incentives to encourage the States to comply
with their statutory obligation to provide for the disposal of waste generated
within their borders.

10

1\. _Monetary incentives._ One quarter of the surcharges collected by the
sited States must be transferred to an escrow account held by the Secretary of
Energy. ยง 2021e(d)(2)(A). The Secretary then makes payments from this account
to each State that has complied with a series of deadlines. By July 1, 1986,
each State was to have ratified legislation either joining a regional compact
or indicating an intent to develop a disposal facility within the State. ยงยง
2021e(e)(1)(A), 2021e(d)(2)(B)(i). By January 1, 1988, each unsited compact
was to have identified the State in which its facility would be located, and
each compact or stand-alone State was to have developed a siting plan and
taken other identified steps. ยงยง 2021e(e)(1)(B), 2021e(d)(2)(B)(ii). By
January 1, 1990, each State or compact was to have filed a complete
application for a license to operate a disposal facility, or the Governor of
any State that had not filed an application was to have certified that the
State would be capable of disposing of all waste generated in the State after
1992. ยงยง 2021e(e)(1)(C), 2021e(d)(2)(B)(iii). The rest of the account is to be
paid out to those States or compacts able to dispose of all low level
radioactive waste generated within their borders by January 1, 1993. ยง
2021e(d)(2)(B)(iv). Each State that has not met the 1993 deadline must either
take title to the waste generated within its borders or forfeit to the waste
generators the incentive payments it has received. ยง 2021e(d)(2)(C).

11

2\. _Access incentives._ The second type of incentive involves the denial of
access to disposal sites. States that fail to meet the July 1986 deadline may
be charged twice the ordinary surcharge for the remainder of 1986 and may be
denied access to disposal facilities thereafter. ยง 2021e(e)(2)(A). States that
fail to meet the 1988 deadline may be charged double surcharges for the first
half of 1988 and quadruple surcharges for the second half of 1988, and may be
denied access thereafter. ยง 2021e(e)(2)(B). States that fail to meet the 1990
deadline may be denied access. ยง 2021e(e)(2)(C). Finally, States that have not
filed complete applications by January 1, 1992, for a license to operate a
disposal facility, or States belonging to compacts that have not filed such
applications, may be charged triple surcharges. ยงยง 2021e(e)(1)(D),
2021e(e)(2)(D).

12

3\. _The take title provision._ The third type of incentive is the most
severe. The Act provides:

13

"If a State (or, where applicable, a compact region) in which low-level
radioactive waste is generated is unable to provide for the disposal of all
such waste generated within such State or compact region by January 1, 1996,
each State in which such waste is generated, upon the request of the generator
or owner of the waste, shall take title to the waste, be obligated to take
possession of the waste, and shall be liable for all damages directly or
indirectly incurred by such generator or owner as a consequence of the failure
of the State to take possession of the waste as soon after January 1, 1996, as
the generator or owner notifies the State that the waste is available for
shipment." ยง 2021e(d)(2)(C).

14

These three incentives are the focus of petitioners' constitutional challenge.

15

In the seven years since the Act took effect, Congress has approved nine
regional compacts, encompassing 42 of the States. All six unsited compacts and
four of the unaffiliated States have met the first three statutory milestones.
Brief for United States 10, n. 19; _id.,_ at 13, n. 25.

16

New York, a State whose residents generate a relatively large share of the
Nation's low level radioactive waste, did not join a regional compact.
Instead, the State complied with the Act's requirements by enacting
legislation providing for the siting and financing of a disposal facility in
New York. The State has identified five potential sites, three in Allegany
County and two in Cortland County. Residents of the two counties oppose the
State's choice of location. App. 29a-30a, 66a-68a.

17

Petitioners--the State of New York and the two counties--filed this suit
against the United States in 1990. They sought a declaratory judgment that the
Act is inconsistent with the Tenth and Eleventh Amendments to the
Constitution, with the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment, and with the
Guarantee Clause of Article IV of the Constitution. The States of Washington,
Nevada, and South Carolina intervened as defendants. The District Court
dismissed the complaint. 757 F.Supp. 10 (NDNY 1990). The Court of Appeals
affirmed. 942 F.2d 114 (CA2 1991). Petitioners have abandoned their Due
Process and Eleventh Amendment claims on their way up the appellate ladder; as
the case stands before us, petitioners claim only that the Act is inconsistent
with the Tenth Amendment and the Guarantee Clause.

II

A.

18

In 1788, in the course of explaining to the citizens of New York why the
recently drafted Constitution provided for federal courts, Alexander Hamilton
observed: "The erection of a new government, whatever care or wisdom may
distinguish the work, cannot fail to originate questions of intricacy and
nicety; and these may, in a particular manner, be expected to flow from the
the establishment of a constitution founded upon the total or partial
incorporation of a number of distinct sovereignties." The Federalist No. 82,
p. 491 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961). Hamilton's prediction has proved quite
accurate. While no one disputes the proposition that "[t]he Constitution
created a Federal Government of limited powers," _Gregory v. Ashcroft,_ 501
U.S. ----, ----, 111 S.Ct. 2395, 2399, 115 L.Ed.2d 410 (1991); and while the
Tenth Amendment makes explicit that "[t]he powers not delegated to the United
States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved
to the States respectively, or to the people"; the task of ascertaining the
constitutional line between federal and state power has given rise to many of
the Court's most difficult and celebrated cases. At least as far back as
_Martin v. Hunter's Lessee,_ 1 Wheat. 304, 324, 4 L.Ed. 97 (1816), the Court
has resolved questions "of great importance and delicacy" in determining
whether particular sovereign powers have been granted by the Constitution to
the Federal Government or have been retained by the States.

19

These questions can be viewed in either of two ways. In some cases the Court
has inquired whether an Act of Congress is authorized by one of the powers
delegated to Congress in Article I of the Constitution. See, _e.g., Perez v.
United States,_ 402 U.S. 146, 91 S.Ct. 1357, 28 L.Ed.2d 686 (1971); _McCulloch
v. Maryland,_ 4 Wheat. 316, 4 L.Ed. 579 (1819). In other cases the Court has
sought to determine whether an Act of Congress invades the province of state
sovereignty reserved by the Tenth Amendment. See, _e.g., Garcia v. San Antonio
Metropolitan Transit Au-_ _thority,_ 469 U.S. 528, 105 S.Ct. 1005, 83 L.Ed.2d
1016 (1985); _Lane County v. Oregon,_ 7 Wall. 71, 19 L.Ed. 101 (1869). In a
case like this one, involving the division of authority between federal and
state governments, the two inquiries are mirror images of each other. If a
power is delegated to Congress in the Constitution, the Tenth Amendment
expressly disclaims any reservation of that power to the States; if a power is
an attribute of state sovereignty reserved by the Tenth Amendment, it is
necessarily a power the Constitution has not conferred on Congress. See
_United States v. Oregon,_ 366 U.S. 643, 649, 81 S.Ct. 1278, 1281, 6 L.Ed.2d
575 (1961); _Case v. Bowles,_ 327 U.S. 92, 102, 66 S.Ct. 438, 443, 90 L.Ed.
552 (1946); _Oklahoma ex rel. Phillips v. Guy F. Atkinson Co.,_ 313 U.S. 508,
534, 61 S.Ct. 1050, 1063, 85 L.Ed. 1487 (1941).

20

It is in this sense that the Tenth Amendment "states but a truism that all is
retained which has not been surrendered." _United States v. Darby,_ 312 U.S.
100, 124, 61 S.Ct. 451, 462, 85 L.Ed. 609 (1941). As Justice Story put it,
"[t]his amendment is a mere affirmation of what, upon any just reasoning, is a
necessary rule of interpreting the constitution. Being an instrument of
limited and enumerated powers, it follows irresistibly, that what is not
conferred, is withheld, and belongs to the state authorities." 3 J. Story,
Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States 752 (1833). This has
been the Court's consistent understanding: "The States unquestionably do
retai[n] a significant measure of sovereign authority . . . to the extent that
the Constitution has not divested them of their original powers and
transferred those powers to the Federal Government." _Garcia v. San Antonio
Metropolitan Transit Authority, supra,_ 469 U.S., at 549, 105 S.Ct., at 1017
(internal quotation marks omitted).

21

Congress exercises its conferred powers subject to the limitations contained
in the Constitution. Thus, for example, under the Commerce Clause Congress may
regulate publishers engaged in interstate commerce, but Congress is
constrained in the exercise of that power by the First Amendment. The Tenth
Amendment likewise restrains the power of Congress, but this limit is not
derived from the text of the Tenth Amendment itself, which, as we have
discussed, is essentially a tautology. Instead, the Tenth Amendment confirms
that the power of the Federal Government is subject to limits that may, in a
given instance, reserve power to the States. The Tenth Amendment thus directs
us to determine, as in this case, whether an incident of state sovereignty is
protected by a limitation on an Article I power.

22

The benefits of this federal structure have been extensively catalogued
elsewhere, see, _e.g., Gregory v. Ashcroft, supra,_ 501 U.S., at ---- - ----,
111 S.Ct., at ---- - ----, 115 L.Ed.2d 410; Merritt, The Guarantee Clause and
State Autonomy: Federalism for a Third Century, 88 Colum.L.Rev. 1, 3-10
(1988); McConnell, Federalism: Evaluating the Founders' Design, 54
U.Chi.L.Rev. 1484, 1491-1511 (1987), but they need not concern us here. Our
task would be the same even if one could prove that federalism secured no
advantages to anyone. It consists not of devising our preferred system of
government, but of understanding and applying the framework set forth in the
Constitution. "The question is not what power the Federal Government ought to
have but what powers in fact have been given by the people." _United States v.
Butler,_ 297 U.S. 1, 63, 56 S.Ct. 312, 318, 80 L.Ed. 477 (1936).

23

This framework has been sufficiently flexible over the past two centuries to
allow for enormous changes in the nature of government. The Federal Government
undertakes activities today that would have been unimaginable to the Framers
in two senses; first, because the Framers would not have conceived that _any_
government would conduct such activities; and second, because the Framers
would not have believed that the _Federal_ Government, rather than the States,
would assume such responsibilities. Yet the powers conferred upon the Federal
Government by the Constitution were phrased in language broad enough to allow
for the expansion of the Federal Government's role. Among the provisions of
the Constitution that have been particularly important in this regard, three
concern us here.

24

First, the Constitution allocates to Congress the power "[t]o regulate
Commerce . . . among the several States." Art. I, ยง 8, cl. 3. Interstate
commerce was an established feature of life in the late 18th century. See,
_e.g.,_ The Federalist No. 42, p. 267 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961) ("The defect of
power in the existing Confederacy to regulate the commerce between its several
members [has] been clearly pointed out by experience"). The volume of
interstate commerce and the range of commonly accepted objects of government
regulation have, however, expanded considerably in the last 200 years, and the
regulatory authority of Congress has expanded along with them. As interstate
commerce has become ubiquitous, activities once considered purely local have
come to have effects on the national economy, and have accordingly come within
the scope of Congress' commerce power. See, _e.g., Katzenbach v. McClung,_ 379
U.S. 294, 85 S.Ct. 377, 13 L.Ed.2d 290 (1964); _Wickard v. Filburn,_ 317 U.S.
111, 63 S.Ct. 82, 87 L.Ed. 122 (1942).

25

Second, the Constitution authorizes Congress "to pay the Debts and provide for
the . . . general Welfare of the United States." Art. I, ยง 8, cl. 1. As
conventional notions of the proper objects of government spending have changed
over the years, so has the ability of Congress to "fix the terms on which it
shall disburse federal money to the States." _Pennhurst State School and
Hospital v. Halderman,_ 451 U.S. 1, 17, 101 S.Ct. 1531, 1539, 67 L.Ed.2d 694
(1981). Compare, _e.g., United States v. Butler, supra,_ 297 U.S., at 72-75,
56 S.Ct., at 322-323 (spending power does not authorize Congress to subsidize
farmers), with _South Dakota v. Dole,_ 483 U.S. 203, 107 S.Ct. 2793, 97
L.Ed.2d 171 (1987) (spending power permits Congress to condition highway funds
on States' adoption of minimum drinking age). While the spending power is
"subject to several general restrictions articulated in our cases," _id.,_ at
207, 107 S.Ct., at 2796, these restrictions have not been so severe as to
prevent the regulatory authority of Congress from generally keeping up with
the growth of the federal budget.

26

The Court's broad construction of Congress' power under the Commerce and
Spending Clauses has of course been guided, as it has with respect to
Congress' power generally, by the Constitution's Necessary and Proper Clause,
which authorizes Congress "[t]o make all Laws which shall be necessary and
proper for carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers." U.S. Const., Art.
I., ยง 8, cl. 18. See, _e.g., Legal Tender Case (Juilliard v. Greenman),_ 110
U.S. 421, 449-450, 4 S.Ct. 122, 131, 28 L.Ed. 204 (1884); _McCulloch v.
Maryland,_ 4 Wheat., at 411-421.

27

Finally, the Constitution provides that "the Laws of the United States . . .
shall be the supreme Law of the Land . . . any Thing in the Constitution or
Laws of any State to the Contrary notwithstanding." U.S. Const., Art. VI, cl.
2. As the Federal Government's willingness to exercise power within the
confines of the Constitution has grown, the authority of the States has
correspondingly diminished to the extent that federal and state policies have
conflicted. See, _e.g., Shaw v. Delta Air Lines, Inc.,_ 463 U.S. 85, 103 S.Ct.
2890, 77 L.Ed.2d 490 (1983). We have observed that the Supremacy Clause gives
the Federal Government "a decided advantage in th[e] delicate balance" the
Constitution strikes between State and Federal power. _Gregory v. Ashcroft,_
501 U.S., at ----, 111 S.Ct., at 2400.

28

The actual scope of the Federal Government's authority with respect to the
States has changed over the years, therefore, but the constitutional structure
underlying and limiting that authority has not. In the end, just as a cup may
be half empty or half full, it makes no difference whether one views the
question at issue in this case as one of ascertaining the limits of the power
delegated to the Federal Government under the affirmative provisions of the
Constitution or one of discerning the core of sovereignty retained by the
States under the Tenth Amendment. Either way, we must determine whether any of
the three challenged provisions of the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy
Amendments Act of 1985 oversteps the boundary between federal and state
authority.

B

29

Petitioners do not contend that Congress lacks the power to regulate the
disposal of low level radioactive waste. Space in radioactive waste disposal
sites is frequently sold by residents of one State to residents of another.
Regulation of the resulting interstate market in waste disposal is therefore
well within Congress' authority under the Commerce Clause. Cf. _Philadelphia
v. New Jersey,_ 437 U.S. 617, 621-623, 98 S.Ct. 2531, 2534-2535, 57 L.Ed.2d
475 (1978); _Fort Gratiot Sanitary Landfill, Inc. v. Michigan Dept. of Natural
Resources,_ 504 U.S. ----, ----, 112 S.Ct. 2019, 2023, 119 L.Ed.2d 139 (1992).
Petitioners likewise do not dispute that under the Supremacy Clause Congress
could, if it wished, pre-empt state radioactive waste regulation. Petitioners
contend only that the Tenth Amendment limits the power of Congress to regulate
in the way it has chosen. Rather than addressing the problem of waste disposal
by directly regulating the generators and disposers of waste, petitioners
argue, Congress has impermissibly directed the States to regulate in this
field.

30

Most of our recent cases interpreting the Tenth Amendment have concerned the
authority of Congress to subject state governments to generally applicable
laws. The Court's jurisprudence in this area has traveled an unsteady path.
See _Maryland v. Wirtz,_ 392 U.S. 183, 88 S.Ct. 2017, 20 L.Ed.2d 1020 (1968)
(state schools and hospitals are subject to Fair Labor Standards Act);
_National League of Cities v. Usery,_ 426 U.S. 833, 96 S.Ct. 2465, 49 L.Ed.2d
245 (1976) (overruling _Wirtz_ ) (state employers are _not_ subject to Fair
Labor Standards Act); _Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority,_
469 U.S. 528, 105 S.Ct. 1005, 83 L.Ed.2d 1016 (1985) (overruling _National
League of Cities_ ) (state employers are once again subject to Fair Labor
Standards Act). See also _New York v. United States,_ 326 U.S. 572, 66 S.Ct.
310, 90 L.Ed. 326 (1946); _Fry v. United States,_ 421 U.S. 542, 95 S.Ct. 1792,
44 L.Ed.2d 363 (1975); _Transportation Union v. Long Island R. Co.,_ 455 U.S.
678, 102 S.Ct. 1349, 71 L.Ed.2d 547 (1982); _EEOC v. Wyoming,_ 460 U.S. 226,
103 S.Ct. 1054, 75 L.Ed.2d 18 (1983); _South Carolina v. Baker,_ 485 U.S. 505,
108 S.Ct. 1355, 99 L.Ed.2d 592 (1988); _Gregory v. Ashcroft,_ 501 U.S. ----,
111 S.Ct. 2395, 115 L.Ed.2d 410 (1991). This case presents no occasion to
apply or revisit the holdings of any of these cases, as this is not a case in
which Congress has subjected a State to the same legislation applicable to
private parties. Cf. _FERC v. Mississippi,_ 456 U.S. 742, 758-759, 102 S.Ct.
2126, 2137, 72 L.Ed.2d 532 (1982).

31

This case instead concerns the circumstances under which Congress may use the
States as implements of regulation; that is, whether Congress may direct or
otherwise motivate the States to regulate in a particular field or a
particular way. Our cases have established a few principles that guide our
resolution of the issue.

32

* As an initial matter, Congress may not simply "commandee[r] the legislative processes of the States by directly compelling them to enact and enforce a federal regulatory program." _Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation Assn., Inc.,_ 452 U.S. 264, 288, 101 S.Ct. 2352, 2366, 69 L.Ed.2d 1 (1981). In _Hodel,_ the Court upheld the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 precisely because it did _not_ "commandeer" the States into regulating mining. The Court found that "the States are not compelled to enforce the steep-slope standards, to expend any state funds, or to participate in the federal regulatory program in any manner whatsoever. If a State does not wish to submit a proposed permanent program that complies with the Act and implementing regulations, the full regulatory burden will be borne by the Federal Government." _Ibid._

33

The Court reached the same conclusion the following year in _FERC v.
Mississippi, supra._ At issue in _FERC_ was the Public Utility Regulatory
Policies Act of 1978, a federal statute encouraging the States in various ways
to develop programs to combat the Nation's energy crisis. We observed that
"this Court never has sanctioned explicitly a federal command to the States to
promulgate and enforce laws and regulations." _Id.,_ 456 U.S., at 761-762, 102
S.Ct., at 2139. As in _Hodel,_ the Court upheld the statute at issue because
it did not view the statute as such a command. The Court emphasized: "Titles I
and III of [the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 (PURPA) ]
require _only consideration_ of federal standards. And if a State has no
utilities commission, or simply stops regulating in the field, it need not
even entertain the federal proposals." 456 U.S., at 764, 102 S.Ct., 2140
(emphasis in original). Because "[t]here [wa]s nothing in PURPA 'directly
compelling' the States to enact a legislative program," the statute was not
inconsistent with the Constitution's division of authority between the Federal
Government and the States. _Id.,_ 456 U.S., at 765, 102 S.Ct., at 2141
(quoting _Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation Assn., Inc., supra,_
452 U.S., at 288, 101 S.Ct., at 2366). See also _South Carolina v. Baker,
supra,_ 485 U.S., at 513, 108 S.Ct., at 1361 (noting "the possibility that the
Tenth Amendment might set some limits on Congress' power to compel States to
regulate on behalf of federal interests"); _Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan
Transit Authority, supra,_ 469 U.S., at 556, 105 S.Ct., at 1020 (same).

34

These statements in _FERC_ and _Hodel_ were not innovations. While Congress
has substantial powers to govern the Nation directly, including in areas of
intimate concern to the States, the Constitution has never been understood to
confer upon Congress the ability to require the States to govern according to
Congress' instructions. See _Coyle v. Oklahoma,_ 221 U.S. 559, 565, 31 S.Ct.
688, 689, 55 L.Ed. 853 (1911). The Court has been explicit about this
distinction. "Both the States and the United States existed before the
Constitution. The people, through that instrument, established a more perfect
union by substituting a national government, acting, with ample power,
_directly upon the citizens,_ instead of the Confederate government, which
acted with powers, greatly restricted, only upon the States." _Lane County v.
Oregon,_ 7 Wall., at 76 (emphasis added). The Court has made the same point
with more rhetorical flourish, although perhaps with less precision, on a
number of occasions. In Chief Justice Chase's much-quoted words, "the
preservation of the States, and the maintenance of their governments, are as
much within the design and care of the Constitution as the preservation of the
Union and the maintenance of the National government. The Constitution, in all
its provisions, looks to an indestructible Union, composed of indestructible
States." _Texas v. White,_ 7 Wall. 700, 725, 19 L.Ed. 227 (1869). See also
_Metcalf & Eddy v. Mitchell,_ 269 U.S. 514, 523, 46 S.Ct. 172, 174, 70 L.Ed.
384 (1926) ("neither government may destroy the other nor curtail in any
substantial manner the exercise of its powers"); _Tafflin v. Levitt,_ 493 U.S.
455, 458, 110 S.Ct. 792, 795, 107 L.Ed.2d 887 (1990) ("under our federal
system, the States possess sovereignty concurrent with that of the Federal
Government"); _Gregory v. Ashcroft,_ 501 U.S., at ----, 111 S.Ct., at 2401
("the States retain substantial sovereign powers under our constitutional
scheme, powers with which Congress does not readily interfere").

35

Indeed, the question whether the Constitution should permit Congress to employ
state governments as regulatory agencies was a topic of lively debate among
the Framers. Under the Articles of Confederation, Congress lacked the
authority in most respects to govern the people directly. In practice,
Congress "could not directly tax or legislate upon individuals; it had no
explicit 'legislative' or 'governmental' power to make binding 'law'
enforceable as such." Amar, Of Sovereignty and Federalism, 96 Yale L.J. 1425,
1447 (1987).

36

The inadequacy of this governmental structure was responsible in part for the
Constitutional Convention. Alexander Hamilton observed: "The great and radical
vice in the construction of the existing Confederation is in the principle of
LEGISLATION for STATES or GOVERNMENTS, in their CORPORATE or COLLECTIVE
CAPACITIES, and as contra-distinguished from the INDIVIDUALS of whom they
consist." The Federalist No. 15, p. 108 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961). As Hamilton
saw it, "we must resolve to incorporate into our plan those ingredients which
may be considered as forming the characteristic difference between a league
and a government; we must extend the authority of the Union to the persons of
the citizens--the only proper objects of government." _Id.,_ at 109. The new
National Government "must carry its agency to the persons of the citizens. It
must stand in need of no intermediate legislations. . . . The government of
the Union, like that of each State, must be able to address itself immediately
to the hopes and fears of individuals." _Id.,_ No. 16, p. 116.

37

The Convention generated a great number of proposals for the structure of the
new Government, but two quickly took center stage. Under the Virginia Plan, as
first introduced by Edmund Randolph, Congress would exercise legislative
authority directly upon individuals, without employing the States as
intermediaries. 1 Records of the Federal Convention of 1787, p. 21 (M. Farrand
ed. 1911). Under the New Jersey Plan, as first introduced by William Paterson,
Congress would continue to require the approval of the States before
legislating, as it has under the Articles of Confederation. 1 _id.,_ 243-244.
These two plans underwent various revisions as the Convention progressed, but
they remained the two primary options discussed by the delegates. One
frequently expressed objection to the New Jersey Plan was that it might
require the Federal Government to coerce the States into implementing
legislation. As Randolph explained the distinction, "[t]he true question is
whether we shall adhere to the federal plan [ _i.e.,_ the New Jersey Plan], or
introduce the national plan. The insufficiency of the former has been fully
displayed. . . . There are but two modes, by which the end of a Gen[eral]
Gov[ernment] can be attained: the 1st is by coercion as proposed by Mr.
P[aterson's] plan[, the 2nd] by real legislation as prop[osed] by the other
plan. Coercion [is] _impracticable, expensive, cruel to individuals_. . . . We
must resort therefore to a national _Legislation over individuals._ " 1 _id.,_
at 255-256 (emphasis in original). Madison echoed this view: "The
practicability of making laws, with coercive sanctions, for the States as
political bodies, had been exploded on all hands." 2 _id.,_ at 9.

38

Under one preliminary draft of what would become the New Jersey Plan, state
governments would occupy a position relative to Congress similar to that
contemplated by the Act at issue in this case: "[T]he laws of the United
States ought, as far as may be consistent with the common interests of the
Union, to be carried into execution by the judiciary and executive officers of
the respective states, wherein the execution thereof is required." 3 _id.,_ at
616. This idea apparently never even progressed so far as to be debated by the
delegates, as contemporary accounts of the Convention do not mention any such
discussion. The delegates' many descriptions of the Virginia and New Jersey
Plans speak only in general terms about whether Congress was to derive its
authority from the people or from the States, and whether it was to issue
directives to individuals or to States. See 1 _id.,_ at 260-280.

39

In the end, the Convention opted for a Constitution in which Congress would
exercise its legislative authority directly over individuals rather than over
States; for a variety of reasons, it rejected the New Jersey Plan in favor of
the Virginia Plan. 1 _id.,_ at 313. This choice was made clear to the
subsequent state ratifying conventions. Oliver Ellsworth, a member of the
Connecticut delegation in Philadelphia, explained the distinction to his
State's convention: "This Constitution does not attempt to coerce sovereign
bodies, states, in their political capacity. . . . But this legal coercion
singles out the . . . individual." 2 J. Elliot, Debates on the Federal
Constitution 197 (2d ed. 1863). Charles Pinckney, another delegate at the
Constitutional Convention, emphasized to the South Carolina House of
Representatives that in Philadelphia "the necessity of having a government
which should at once operate upon the people, and not upon the states, was
conceived to be indispensable by every delegation present." 4 _id.,_ at 256.
Rufus King, one of Massachusetts' delegates, returned home to support
ratification by recalling the Commonwealth's unhappy experience under the
Articles of Confederation and arguing: "Laws, to be effective, therefore, must
not be laid on states, but upon individuals." 2 _id.,_ at 56. At New York's
convention, Hamilton (another delegate in Philadelphia) exclaimed: "But can we
believe that one state will ever suffer itself to be used as an instrument of
coercion? The thing is a dream; it is impossible. Then we are brought to this
dilemma--either a federal standing army is to enforce the requisitions, or the
federal treasury is left without supplies, and the government without support.
What, sir, is the cure for this great evil? Nothing, but to enable the
national laws to operate on individuals, in the same manner as those of the
states do." 2 _id.,_ at 233. At North Carolina's convention, Samuel Spencer
recognized that "all the laws of the Confederation were binding on the states
in their political capacities, . . . but now the thing is entirely different.
The laws of Congress will be binding on individuals." 4 _id.,_ at 153.

40

In providing for a stronger central government, therefore, the Framers
explicitly chose a Constitution that confers upon Congress the power to
regulate individuals, not States. As we have seen, the Court has consistently
respected this choice. We have always understood that even where Congress has
the authority under the Constitution to pass laws requiring or prohibiting
certain acts, it lacks the power directly to compel the States to require or
prohibit those acts. _E.g., FERC v. Mississippi,_ 456 U.S., at 762-766, 102
S.Ct., at 2138-2141; _Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation Assn.,
Inc.,_ 452 U.S., at 288-289, 101 S.Ct., at 2366; _Lane County v. Oregon,_ 7
Wall., at 76. The allocation of power contained in the Commerce Clause, for
example, authorizes Congress to regulate interstate commerce directly; it does
not authorize Congress to regulate state governments' regulation of interstate
commerce.

2

41

This is not to say that Congress lacks the ability to encourage a State to
regulate in a particular way, or that Congress may not hold out incentives to
the States as a method of influencing a State's policy choices. Our cases have
identified a variety of methods, short of outright coercion, by which Congress
may urge a State to adopt a legislative program consistent with federal
interests. Two of these methods are of particular relevance here.

42

First, under Congress' spending power, "Congress may attach conditions on the
receipt of federal funds." _South Dakota v. Dole,_ 483 U.S., at 206, 107
S.Ct., at 2795. Such conditions must (among other requirements) bear some
relationship to the purpose of the federal spending, _id.,_ at 207-208, and n.
3, 107 S.Ct., at 2796, and n. 3; otherwise, of course, the spending power
could render academic the Constitution's other grants and limits of federal
authority. Where the recipient of federal funds is a State, as is not unusual
today, the conditions attached to the funds by Congress may influence a
State's legislative choices. See Kaden, Politics, Money, and State
Sovereignty: The Judicial Role, 79 Colum.L.Rev. 847, 874-881 (1979). _Dole_
was one such case: The Court found no constitutional flaw in a federal statute
directing the Secretary of Transportation to withhold federal highway funds
from States failing to adopt Congress' choice of a minimum drinking age.
Similar examples abound. See, _e.g., Fullilove v. Klutznick,_ 448 U.S. 448,
478-480, 100 S.Ct. 2758, 2775, 65 L.Ed.2d 902 (1980); _Massachusetts v. United
States,_ 435 U.S. 444, 461-462, 98 S.Ct. 1153, 1164, 55 L.Ed.2d 403 (1978);
_Lau v. Nichols,_ 414 U.S. 563, 568-569, 94 S.Ct. 786, 789, 39 L.Ed.2d 1
(1974); _Oklahoma v. Civil Service Comm'n,_ 330 U.S. 127, 142-144, 67 S.Ct.
544, 553-554, 91 L.Ed. 794 (1947).

43

Second, where Congress has the authority to regulate private activity under
the Commerce Clause, we have recognized Congress' power to offer States the
choice of regulating that activity according to federal standards or having
state law pre-empted by federal regulation. _Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining
& Reclamation Assn., Inc., supra,_ 452 U.S., at 288, 101 S.Ct., at 2366. See
also _FERC v. Mississippi, supra,_ 456 U.S., at 764-765, 102 S.Ct., at 2140.
This arrangement, which has been termed "a program of cooperative federalism,"
_Hodel, supra,_ 452 U.S., at 289, 101 S.Ct., at 2366, is replicated in
numerous federal statutory schemes. These include the Clean Water Act, 86
Stat. 816, as amended, 33 U.S.C. ยง 1251 _et seq.,_ see _Arkansas v. Oklahoma,_
503 U.S. ----, ----, 112 S.Ct. 1046, 1054, 117 L.Ed.2d 239 (1992) (Clean Water
Act "anticipates a partnership between the States and the Federal Government,
animated by a shared objective"); the Occupational Safety and Health Act of
1970, 84 Stat. 1590, 29 U.S.C. ยง 651 _et seq.,_ see _Gade v. National Solid
Wastes Management Assn.,_ \--- U.S. ----, ----, 112 S.Ct. 2374, ----, ---
L.Ed.2d ---- (1992); the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 90
Stat. 2796, as amended, 42 U.S.C. ยง 6901 _et seq.,_ see _United States Dept.
of Energy v. Ohio,_ 503 U.S. ----, ----, 112 S.Ct. 1627, 1632, 118 L.Ed.2d 255
(1992); and the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act, 94 Stat.
2374, 16 U.S.C. ยง 3101 _et seq.,_ see _Kenaitze Indian Tribe v. Alaska,_ 860
F.2d 312, 314 (CA9 1988), cert. denied, 491 U.S. 905, 109 S.Ct. 3187, 105
L.Ed.2d 695 (1989).

44

By either of these two methods, as by any other permissible method of
encouraging a State to conform to federal policy choices, the residents of the
State retain the ultimate decision as to whether or not the State will comply.
If a State's citizens view federal policy as sufficiently contrary to local
interests, they may elect to decline a federal grant. If state residents would
prefer their government to devote its attention and resources to problems
other than those deemed important by Congress, they may choose to have the
Federal Government rather than the State bear the expense of a federally
mandated regulatory program, and they may continue to supplement that program
to the extent state law is not preempted. Where Congress encourages state
regulation rather than compelling it, state governments remain responsive to
the local electorate's preferences; state officials remain accountable to the
people.

45

By contrast, where the Federal Government compels States to regulate, the
accountability of both state and federal officials is diminished. If the
citizens of New York, for example, do not consider that making provision for
the disposal of radioactive waste is in their best interest, they may elect
state officials who share their view. That view can always be preempted under
the Supremacy Clause if it is contrary to the national view, but in such a
case it is the Federal Government that makes the decision in full view of the
public, and it will be federal officials that suffer the consequences if the
decision turns out to be detrimental or unpopular. But where the Federal
Government directs the States to regulate, it may be state officials who will
bear the brunt of public disapproval, while the federal officials who devised
the regulatory program may remain insulated from the electoral ramifications
of their decision. Accountability is thus diminished when, due to federal
coercion, elected state officials cannot regulate in accordance with the views
of the local electorate in matters not pre-empted by federal regulation. See
Merritt, 88 Colum.L.Rev., at 61-62; La Pierre, Political Accountability in the
National Political Process--The Alternative to Judicial Review of Federalism
Issues, 80 Nw.U.L.Rev. 577, 639-665 (1985).

46

With these principles in mind, we turn to the three challenged provisions of
the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments Act of 1985.

III

47

The parties in this case advance two quite different views of the Act. As
petitioners see it, the Act imposes a requirement directly upon the States
that they regulate in the field of radioactive waste disposal in order to meet
Congress' mandate that "[e]ach State shall be responsible for providing . . .
for the disposal of . . . low-level radioactive waste." 42 U.S.C. ยง
2021c(a)(1)(A). Petitioners understand this provision as a direct command from
Congress, enforceable independent of the three sets of incentives provided by
the Act. Respondents, on the other hand, read this provision together with the
incentives, and see the Act as affording the States three sets of choices.
According to respondents, the Act permits a State to choose first between
regulating pursuant to federal standards and losing the right to a share of
the Secretary of Energy's escrow account; to choose second between regulating
pursuant to federal standards and progressively losing access to disposal
sites in other States; and to choose third between regulating pursuant to
federal standards and taking title to the waste generated within the State.
Respondents thus interpret ยง 2021c(a)(1)(A), despite the statute's use of the
word "shall," to provide no more than an option which a State may elect or
eschew.

48

The Act could plausibly be understood either as a mandate to regulate or as a
series of incentives. Under petitioners' view, however, ยง 2021c(a)(1)(A) of
the Act would clearly "commandee[r] the legislative processes of the States by
directly compelling them to enact and enforce a federal regulatory program."
_Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation Assn., Inc.,_ 452 U.S., at
288, 101 S.Ct., at 2366. We must reject this interpretation of the provision
for two reasons. First, such an outcome would, to say the least, "upset the
usual constitutional balance of federal and state powers." _Gregory v.
Ashcroft,_ 501 U.S., at ----, 111 S.Ct., at 2401. "[I]t is incumbent upon the
federal courts to be certain of Congress' intent before finding that federal
law overrides this balance," _ibid._ (internal quotation marks omitted), but
the Act's amenability to an equally plausible alternative construction
prevents us from possessing such certainty. Second, "where an otherwise
acceptable construction of a statute would raise serious constitutional
problems, the Court will construe the statute to avoid such problems unless
such construction is plainly contrary to the intent of Congress." _Edward J.
DeBartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Building & Construction Trades Council,_
485 U.S. 568, 575, 108 S.Ct. 1392, 1397, 99 L.Ed.2d 645 (1988). This rule of
statutory construction pushes us away from petitioners' understanding of ยง
2021c(a)(1)(A) of the Act, under which it compels the States to regulate
according to Congress' instructions.

49

We therefore decline petitioners' invitation to construe ยง 2021c(a)(1)(A),
alone and in isolation, as a command to the States independent of the
remainder of the Act. Construed as a whole, the Act comprises three sets of
"incentives" for the States to provide for the disposal of low level
radioactive waste generated within their borders. We consider each in turn.

50

* The first set of incentives works in three steps. First, Congress has authorized States with disposal sites to impose a surcharge on radioactive waste received from other States. Second, the Secretary of Energy collects a portion of this surcharge and places the money in an escrow account. Third, States achieving a series of milestones receive portions of this fund.

51

The first of these steps is an unexceptionable exercise of Congress' power to
authorize the States to burden interstate commerce. While the Commerce Clause
has long been understood to limit the States' ability to discriminate against
interstate commerce, see, _e.g., Wyoming v. Oklahoma,_ 502 U.S. ----, ----,
112 S.Ct. 789, 800, 117 L.Ed.2d 1 (1992); _Cooley v. Board of Wardens of Port
of Philadelphia,_ 12 How. 299, 13 L.Ed. 996 (1851), that limit may be lifted,
as it has been here, by an expression of the "unambiguous intent" of Congress.
_Wyoming, supra,_ 502 U.S., at ----, 112 S.Ct., at 802; _Prudential Ins. Co.
v. Benjamin,_ 328 U.S. 408, 427-431, 66 S.Ct. 1142, 1153-1156, 90 L.Ed. 1342
(1946). Whether or not the States would be permitted to burden the interstate
transport of low level radioactive waste in the absence of Congress' approval,
the States can clearly do so _with_ Congress' approval, which is what the Act
gives them.

52

The second step, the Secretary's collection of a percentage of the surcharge,
is no more than a federal tax on interstate commerce, which petitioners do not
claim to be an invalid exercise of either Congress' commerce or taxing power.
Cf. _United States v. Sanchez,_ 340 U.S. 42, 44-45, 71 S.Ct. 108, 110, 95
L.Ed. 47 (1950); _Steward Machine Co. v. Davis,_ 301 U.S. 548, 581-583, 57
S.Ct. 883, 888-889, 81 L.Ed. 1279 (1937).

53

The third step is a conditional exercise of Congress' authority under the
Spending Clause: Congress has placed conditions--the achievement of the
milestones--on the receipt of federal funds. Petitioners do not contend that
Congress has exceeded its authority in any of the four respects our cases have
identified. See generally _South Dakota v. Dole,_ 483 U.S., at 207-208, 107
S.Ct., at 2796. The expenditure is for the general welfare, _Helvering v.
Davis,_ 301 U.S. 619, 640-641, 57 S.Ct. 904, 908, 81 L.Ed. 1307 (1937); the
States are required to use the money they receive for the purpose of assuring
the safe disposal of radioactive waste. 42 U.S.C. ยง 2021e(d)(2)(E). The
conditions imposed are unambiguous, _Pennhurst State School and Hospital v.
Halderman,_ 451 U.S., at 17, 101 S.Ct., at 1540; the Act informs the States
exactly what they must do and by when they must do it in order to obtain a
share of the escrow account. The conditions imposed are reasonably related to
the purpose of the expenditure, _Massachusetts v. United States,_ 435 U.S., at
461, 98 S.Ct., at 1164; both the conditions and the payments embody Congress'
efforts to address the pressing problem of radioactive waste disposal.
Finally, petitioners do not claim that the conditions imposed by the Act
violate any independent constitutional prohibition. _Lawrence County v. Lead-
Deadwood School Dist.,_ 469 U.S. 256, 269-270, 105 S.Ct. 695, 702-703, 83
L.Ed.2d 635 (1985).

54

Petitioners contend nevertheless that the _form_ of these expenditures removes
them from the scope of Congress' spending power. Petitioners emphasize the
Act's instruction to the Secretary of Energy to "deposit all funds received in
a special escrow account. The funds so deposited shall not be the property of
the United States." 42 U.S.C. ยง 2021e(d)(2)(A). Petitioners argue that because
the money collected and redisbursed to the States is kept in an account
separate from the general treasury, because the Secretary holds the funds only
as a trustee, and because the States themselves are largely able to control
whether they will pay into the escrow account or receive a share, the Act "in
no manner calls for the spending of federal funds." Reply Brief for Petitioner
State of New York 6.

55

The Constitution's grant to Congress of the authority to "pay the Debts and
provide for the . . . general Welfare" has never, however, been thought to
mandate a particular form of accounting. A great deal of federal spending
comes from segregated trust funds collected and spent for a particular
purpose. See, _e.g.,_ 23 U.S.C. ยง 118 (Highway Trust Fund); 42 U.S.C. ยง 401(a)
(Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund); 42 U.S.C. ยง 401(b)
(Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund); 42 U.S.C. ยง 1395t (Federal
Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund). The Spending Clause has never
been construed to deprive Congress of the power to structure federal spending
in this manner. Petitioners' argument regarding the States' ability to
determine the escrow account's income and disbursements ignores the fact that
Congress specifically provided the States with this ability as a method of
encouraging the States to regulate according to the federal plan. That the
States are able to choose whether they will receive federal funds does not
make the resulting expenditures any less federal; indeed, the location of such
choice in the States is an inherent element in any conditional exercise of
Congress' spending power.

56

The Act's first set of incentives, in which Congress has conditioned grants to
the States upon the States' attainment of a series of milestones, is thus well
within the authority of Congress under the Commerce and Spending Clauses.
Because the first set of incentives is supported by affirmative constitutional
grants of power to Congress, it is not inconsistent with the Tenth Amendment.

B

57

In the second set of incentives, Congress has authorized States and regional
compacts with disposal sites gradually to increase the cost of access to the
sites, and then to deny access altogether, to radioactive waste generated in
States that do not meet federal deadlines. As a simple regulation, this
provision would be within the power of Congress to authorize the States to
discriminate against interstate commerce. See _Northeast Bancorp, Inc. v.
Board of Governors, Fed. Reserve System,_ 472 U.S. 159, 174-175, 105 S.Ct.
2545, 2554, 86 L.Ed.2d 112 (1985). Where federal regulation of private
activity is within the scope of the Commerce Clause, we have recognized the
ability of Congress to offer states the choice of regulating that activity
according to federal standards or having state law pre-empted by federal
regulation. See _Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining & Reclamation Association,_
452 U.S., at 288, 101 S.Ct., at 2366; _FERC v. Mississippi,_ 456 U.S., at
764-765, 102 S.Ct., at 2140.

58

This is the choice presented to nonsited States by the Act's second set of
incentives: States may either regulate the disposal of radioactive waste
according to federal standards by attaining local or regional self-
sufficiency, or their residents who produce radioactive waste will be subject
to federal regulation authorizing sited States and regions to deny access to
their disposal sites. The affected States are not compelled by Congress to
regulate, because any burden caused by a State's refusal to regulate will fall
on those who generate waste and find no outlet for its disposal, rather than
on the State as a sovereign. A State whose citizens do not wish it to attain
the Act's milestones may devote its attention and its resources to issues its
citizens deem more worthy; the choice remains at all times with the residents
of the State, not with Congress. The State need not expend any funds, or
participate in any federal program, if local residents do not view such
expenditures or participation as worthwhile. Cf. _Hodel, supra,_ 452 U.S., at
288, 101 S.Ct., at 2366. Nor must the State abandon the field if it does not
accede to federal direction; the State may continue to regulate the generation
and disposal of radioactive waste in any manner its citizens see fit.

59

The Act's second set of incentives thus represents a conditional exercise of
Congress' commerce power, along the lines of those we have held to be within
Congress' authority. As a result, the second set of incentives does not
intrude on the sovereignty reserved to the States by the Tenth Amendment.

C

60

The take title provision is of a different character. This third so-called
"incentive" offers States, as an alternative to regulating pursuant to
Congress' direction, the option of taking title to and possession of the low
level radioactive waste generated within their borders and becoming liable for
all damages waste generators suffer as a result of the States' failure to do
so promptly. In this provision, Congress has crossed the line distinguishing
encouragement from coercion.

61

We must initially reject respondents' suggestion that, because the take title
provision will not take effect until January 1, 1996, petitioners' challenge
thereto is unripe. It takes many years to develop a new disposal site. All
parties agree that New York must take action now in order to avoid the take
title provision's consequences, and no party suggests that the State's waste
generators will have ceased producing waste by 1996. The issue is thus ripe
for review. Cf. _Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. State Energy Resources
Conservation and Development Comm'n,_ 461 U.S. 190, 201, 103 S.Ct. 1713, 1721,
75 L.Ed.2d 752 (1983); _Regional Rail Reorganization Act Cases,_ 419 U.S. 102,
144-145, 95 S.Ct. 335, 359, 42 L.Ed.2d 320 (1974).

62

The take title provision offers state governments a "choice" of either
accepting ownership of waste or regulating according to the instructions of
Congress. Respondents do not claim that the Constitution would authorize
Congress to impose either option as a freestanding requirement. On one hand,
the Constitution would not permit Congress simply to transfer radioactive
waste from generators to state governments. Such a forced transfer, standing
alone, would in principle be no different than a congressionally compelled
subsidy from state governments to radioactive waste producers. The same is
true of the provision requiring the States to become liable for the
generators' damages. Standing alone, this provision would be indistinguishable
from an Act of Congress directing the States to assume the liabilities of
certain state residents. Either type of federal action would "commandeer"
state governments into the service of federal regulatory purposes, and would
for this reason be inconsistent with the Constitution's division of authority
between federal and state governments. On the other hand, the second
alternative held out to state governments--regulating pursuant to Congress'
direction--would, standing alone, present a simple command to state
governments to implement legislation enacted by Congress. As we have seen, the
Constitution does not empower Congress to subject state governments to this
type of instruction.

63

Because an instruction to state governments to take title to waste, standing
alone, would be beyond the authority of Congress, and because a direct order
to regulate, standing alone, would also be beyond the authority of Congress,
it follows that Congress lacks the power to offer the States a choice between
the two. Unlike the first two sets of incentives, the take title incentive
does not represent the conditional exercise of any congressional power
enumerated in the Constitution. In this provision, Congress has not held out
the threat of exercising its spending power or its commerce power; it has
instead held out the threat, should the States not regulate according to one
federal instruction, of simply forcing the States to submit to another federal
instruction. A choice between two unconstitutionally coercive regulatory
techniques is no choice at all. Either way, "the Act commandeers the
legislative processes of the States by directly compelling them to enact and
enforce a federal regulatory program," _Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining &
Reclamation Assn., Inc., supra,_ 452 U.S., at 288, 101 S.Ct., at 2366, an
outcome that has never been understood to lie within the authority conferred
upon Congress by the Constitution.

64

Respondents emphasize the latitude given to the States to implement Congress'
plan. The Act enables the States to regulate pursuant to Congress'
instructions in any number of different ways. States may avoid taking title by
contracting with sited regional compacts, by building a disposal site alone or
as part of a compact, or by permitting private parties to build a disposal
site. States that host sites may employ a wide range of designs and disposal
methods, subject only to broad federal regulatory limits. This line of
reasoning, however, only underscores the critical alternative a State lacks: A
State may not decline to administer the federal program. No matter which path
the State chooses, it must follow the direction of Congress.

65

The take title provision appears to be unique. No other federal statute has
been cited which offers a state government no option other than that of
implementing legislation enacted by Congress. Whether one views the take title
provision as lying outside Congress' enumerated powers, or as infringing upon
the core of state sovereignty reserved by the Tenth Amendment, the provision
is inconsistent with the federal structure of our Government established by
the Constitution.

IV

66

Respondents raise a number of objections to this understanding of the limits
of Congress' power.

A.

67

The United States proposes three alternative views of the constitutional line
separating state and federal authority. While each view concedes that Congress
_generally_ may not compel state governments to regulate pursuant to federal
direction, each purports to find a limited domain in which such coercion is
permitted by the Constitution.

68

First, the United States argues that the Constitution's prohibition of
congressional directives to state governments can be overcome where the
federal interest is sufficiently important to justify state submission. This
argument contains a kernel of truth: In determining whether the Tenth
Amendment limits the ability of Congress to subject state governments to
generally applicable laws, the Court _has_ in some cases stated that it will
evaluate the strength of federal interests in light of the degree to which
such laws would prevent the State from functioning as a sovereign; that is,
the extent to which such generally applicable laws would impede a state
government's responsibility to represent and be accountable to the citizens of
the State. See, _e.g., EEOC v._ _Wyoming,_ 460 U.S., at 242, n. 17, 103 S.Ct.,
at 1063, n. 17; _Transportation Union v. Long Island R. Co.,_ 455 U.S., at
684, n. 9, 102 S.Ct., at 1354; _National League of Cities v. Usery,_ 426 U.S.,
at 853, 96 S.Ct., at 2475. The Court has more recently departed from this
approach. See, _e.g., South Carolina v. Baker,_ 485 U.S., at 512-513, 108
S.Ct., at 1361; _Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority,_ 469
U.S., at 556-557, 105 S.Ct., at 1020. But whether or not a particularly strong
federal interest enables Congress to bring state governments within the orbit
of generally applicable _federal_ regulation, no Member of the Court has ever
suggested that such a federal interest would enable Congress to command a
state government to enact _state_ regulation. No matter how powerful the
federal interest involved, the Constitution simply does not give Congress the
authority to require the States to regulate. The Constitution instead gives
Congress the authority to regulate matters directly and to pre-empt contrary
state regulation. Where a federal interest is sufficiently strong to cause
Congress to legislate, it must do so directly; it may not conscript state
governments as its agents.

69

Second, the United States argues that the Constitution does, in some
circumstances, permit federal directives to state governments. Various cases
are cited for this proposition, but none support it. Some of these cases
discuss the well established power of Congress to pass laws enforceable in
state courts. See _Testa v. Katt,_ 330 U.S. 386, 67 S.Ct. 810, 91 L.Ed. 967
(1947); _Palmore v. United States,_ 411 U.S. 389, 402, 93 S.Ct. 1670, 1678, 36
L.Ed.2d 342 (1973); see also _Mondou v. New York, N.H. & H.R. Co.,_ 223 U.S.
1, 57, 32 S.Ct. 169, 178, 56 L.Ed. 327 (1912); _Claflin v. Houseman,_ 93 U.S.
130, 136-137 (1876). These cases involve no more than an application of the
Supremacy Clause's provision that federal law "shall be the supreme Law of the
Land," enforceable in every State. More to the point, all involve
congressional regulation of individuals, not congressional requirements that
States regulate. Federal statutes enforceable in state courts do, in a sense,
direct state judges to enforce them, but this sort of federal "direction" of
state judges is mandated by the text of the Supremacy Clause. No comparable
constitutional provision authorizes Congress to command state legislatures to
legislate.

70

Additional cases cited by the United States discuss the power of federal
_courts_ to order state officials to comply with federal law. See _Puerto Rico
v. Branstad,_ 483 U.S. 219, 228, 107 S.Ct. 2802, 2808, 97 L.Ed.2d 187 (1987);
_Washington v. Washington State Commercial Passenger Fishing Vessel Assn.,_
443 U.S. 658, 695, 99 S.Ct. 3055, 3079, 61 L.Ed.2d 823 (1979); _Illinois v.
City of Milwaukee,_ 406 U.S. 91, 106-108, 92 S.Ct. 1385, 1394-1395, 31 L.Ed.2d
712 (1972); see also _Cooper v. Aaron,_ 358 U.S. 1, 18-19, 78 S.Ct. 1401,
1410, 3 L.Ed.2d 5 (1958); _Brown v. Board of Ed.,_ 349 U.S. 294, 300, 75 S.Ct.
753, 756, 99 L.Ed. 1083 (1955); _Ex parte Young,_ 209 U.S. 123, 155-156, 28
S.Ct. 441, 452, 52 L.Ed. 714 (1908). Again, however, the text of the
Constitution plainly confers this authority on the federal courts, the
"judicial Power" of which "shall extend to all Cases, in Law and Equity,
arising under this Constitution, [and] the Laws of the United States . . .;
[and] to Controversies between two or more States; [and] between a State and
Citizens of another State." U.S. Const., Art. III, ยง 2\. The Constitution
contains no analogous grant of authority to Congress. Moreover, the Supremacy
Clause makes federal law paramount over the contrary positions of state
officials; the power of federal courts to enforce federal law thus presupposes
some authority to order state officials to comply. See _Puerto Rico v.
Branstad, supra,_ 483 U.S., at 227-228, 107 S.Ct., at 2808 (overruling
_Kentucky v. Dennison,_ 24 How. 66, 16 L.Ed. 717 (1861)).

71

In sum, the cases relied upon by the United States hold only that federal law
is enforceable in state courts and that federal courts may in proper
circumstances order state officials to comply with federal law, propositions
that by no means imply any authority on the part of Congress to mandate state
regulation.

72

Third, the United States, supported by the three sited regional compacts as
_amici,_ argues that the Constitution envisions a role for Congress as an
arbiter of interstate disputes. The United States observes that federal
courts, and this Court in particular, have frequently resolved conflicts among
States. See, _e.g., Arkansas v. Oklahoma,_ 503 U.S. 91, 112 S.Ct. 1046, 117
L.Ed.2d 239 (1992); _Wyoming v. Oklahoma,_ 502 U.S. 437, 112 S.Ct. 789, 117
L.Ed.2d 1 (1992). Many of these disputes have involved the allocation of
shared resources among the States, a category perhaps broad enough to
encompass the allocation of scarce disposal space for radioactive waste. See,
_e.g., Colorado v. New Mexico,_ 459 U.S. 176, 103 S.Ct. 539, 74 L.Ed.2d 348
(1982); _Arizona v. California,_ 373 U.S. 546, 83 S.Ct. 1468, 10 L.Ed.2d 542
(1963). The United States suggests that if the Court may resolve such
interstate disputes, Congress can surely do the same under the Commerce
Clause. The regional compacts support this argument with a series of
quotations from The Federalist and other contemporaneous documents, which the
compacts contend demonstrate that the Framers established a strong national
legislature for the purpose of resolving trade disputes among the States.
Brief for Rocky Mountain Low-Level Radioactive Waste Compact et al. as _Amici
Curiae_ 17, and n. 16.

73

While the Framers no doubt endowed Congress with the power to regulate
interstate commerce in order to avoid further instances of the interstate
trade disputes that were common under the Articles of Confederation, the
Framers did _not_ intend that Congress should exercise that power through the
mechanism of mandating state regulation. The Constitution established Congress
as "a superintending authority over the reciprocal trade" among the States,
The Federalist No. 42, p. 268 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961), by empowering Congress
to regulate that trade directly, not by authorizing Congress to issue trade-
related orders to state governments. As Madison and Hamilton explained, "a
sovereignty over sovereigns, a government over governments, a legislation for
communities, as contradistinguished from individuals, as it is a solecism in
theory, so in practice it is subversive of the order and ends of civil
polity." _Id.,_ No. 20, p. 138.

B

74

The sited State respondents focus their attention on the process by which the
Act was formulated. They correctly observe that public officials representing
the State of New York lent their support to the Act's enactment. A Deputy
Commissioner of the State's Energy Office testified in favor of the Act. See
Low-Level Waste Legislation: Hearings on H.R. 862, H.R. 1046, H.R. 1083, and
H.R. 1267 before the Subcommittee on Energy and the Environment of the House
Comm. on Interior and Insular Affairs, 99th Cong., 1st Sess. 97-98, 190-199
(1985) (testimony of Charles Guinn). Senator Moynihan of New York spoke in
support of the Act on the floor of the Senate. 131 Cong.Rec. 38423 (1985).
Respondents note that the Act embodies a bargain among the sited and unsited
States, a compromise to which New York was a willing participant and from
which New York has reaped much benefit. Respondents then pose what appears at
first to be a troubling question: How can a federal statute be found an
unconstitutional infringement of State sovereignty when state officials
consented to the statute's enactment?

75

The answer follows from an understanding of the fundamental purpose served by
our Government's federal structure. The Constitution does not protect the
sovereignty of States for the benefit of the States or state governments as
abstract political entities, or even for the benefit of the public officials
governing the States. To the contrary, the Constitution divides authority
between federal and state governments for the protection of individuals. State
sovereignty is not just an end in itself: "Rather, federalism secures to
citizens the liberties that derive from the diffusion of sovereign power."
_Coleman v. Thompson,_ 501 U.S. 722, 759, 111 S.Ct. 2546, 2570, 115 L.Ed.2d
640 (1991) (BLACKMUN, J., dissenting). "Just as the separation and
independence of the coordinate Branches of the Federal Government serves to
prevent the accumulation of excessive power in any one Branch, a healthy
balance of power between the States and the Federal Government will reduce the
risk of tyranny and abuse from either front." _Gregory v. Ashcroft,_ 501 U.S.,
at 458, 111 S.Ct., at 2400 (1991). See The Federalist No. 51, p. 323.

76

Where Congress exceeds its authority relative to the States, therefore, the
departure from the constitutional plan cannot be ratified by the "consent" of
state officials. An analogy to the separation of powers among the Branches of
the Federal Government clarifies this point. The Constitution's division of
power among the three Branches is violated where one Branch invades the
territory of another, whether or not the encroached-upon Branch approves the
encroachment. In _Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 118-137, 96 S.Ct. 612,
682-691, 46 L.Ed.2d 659 (1976), for instance, the Court held that the Congress
had infringed the President's appointment power, despite the fact that the
President himself had manifested his consent to the statute that caused the
infringement by signing it into law. See _National League of Cities v. Usery,_
426 U.S., at 842, n. 12, 96 S.Ct., at 2469 n. 12. In _INS v. Chadha,_ 462 U.S.
919, 944-959, 103 S.Ct. 2764, 2780-2788, 77 L.Ed.2d 317 (1983), we held that
the legislative veto violated the constitutional requirement that legislation
be presented to the President, despite Presidents' approval of hundreds of
statutes containing a legislative veto provision. See _id.,_ at 944-945, 103
S.Ct., at 2781. The constitutional authority of Congress cannot be expanded by
the "consent" of the governmental unit whose domain is thereby narrowed,
whether that unit is the Executive Branch or the States.

77

State officials thus cannot consent to the enlargement of the powers of
Congress beyond those enumerated in the Constitution. Indeed, the facts of
this case raise the possibility that powerful incentives might lead both
federal and state officials to view departures from the federal structure to
be in their personal interests. Most citizens recognize the need for
radioactive waste disposal sites, but few want sites near their homes. As a
result, while it would be well within the authority of either federal or state
officials to choose where the disposal sites will be, it is likely to be in
the political interest of each individual official to avoid being held
accountable to the voters for the choice of location. If a federal official is
faced with the alternatives of choosing a location or directing the States to
do it, the official may well prefer the latter, as a means of shifting
responsibility for the eventual decision. If a state official is faced with
the same set of alternatives--choosing a location or having Congress direct
the choice of a location--the state official may also prefer the latter, as it
may permit the avoidance of personal responsibility. The interests of public
officials thus may not coincide with the Constitution's intergovernmental
allocation of authority. Where state officials purport to submit to the
direction of Congress in this manner, federalism is hardly being advanced.

78

Nor does the State's prior support for the Act estop it from asserting the
Act's unconstitutionality. While New York has received the benefit of the Act
in the form of a few more years of access to disposal sites in other States,
New York has never joined a regional radioactive waste compact. Any estoppel
implications that might flow from membership in a compact, see _West Virginia
ex rel. Dyer v. Sims,_ 341 U.S. 22, 35-36, 71 S.Ct. 557, 564, 95 L.Ed. 713
(1951) (Jackson, J., concurring), thus do not concern us here. The fact that
the Act, like much federal legislation, embodies a compromise among the States
does not elevate the Act (or the antecedent discussions among representatives
of the States) to the status of an interstate agreement requiring Congress'
approval under the Compact Clause. Cf. _Holmes v. Jennison,_ 14 Pet. 540, 572,
10 L.Ed. 579 (1840) (plurality opinion). That a party collaborated with others
in seeking legislation has never been understood to estop the party from
challenging that legislation in subsequent litigation.

V

79

Petitioners also contend that the Act is inconsistent with the Constitution's
Guarantee Clause, which directs the United States to "guarantee to every State
in this Union a Republican Form of Government." U.S. Const., Art. IV, ยง 4\.
Because we have found the take title provision of the Act irreconcilable with
the powers delegated to Congress by the Constitution and hence with the Tenth
Amendment's reservation to the States of those powers not delegated to the
Federal Government, we need only address the applicability of the Guarantee
Clause to the Act's other two challenged provisions.

80

We approach the issue with some trepidation, because the Guarantee Clause has
been an infrequent basis for litigation throughout our history. In most of the
cases in which the Court has been asked to apply the Clause, the Court has
found the claims presented to be nonjusticiable under the "political question"
doctrine. See, _e.g., City of Rome v. United States,_ 446 U.S. 156, 182, n.
17, 100 S.Ct. 1548, 1564, n. 17, 64 L.Ed.2d 119 (1980) (challenge to the
preclearance requirements of the Voting Rights Act); _Baker v. Carr,_ 369 U.S.
186, 218-229, 82 S.Ct. 691, 710-716, 7 L.Ed.2d 663 (1962) (challenge to
apportionment of state legislative districts); _Pacific States Tel. & Tel. Co.
v. Oregon,_ 223 U.S. 118, 140-151, 32 S.Ct. 224, 227-231, 56 L.Ed. 377 (1912)
(challenge to initiative and referendum provisions of state constitution).

81

The view that the Guarantee Clause implicates only nonjusticiable political
questions has its origin in _Luther v. Borden,_ 7 How. 1, 12 L.Ed. 581 (1849),
in which the Court was asked to decide, in the wake of Dorr's Rebellion, which
of two rival governments was the legitimate government of Rhode Island. The
Court held that "it rests with Congress," not the judiciary, "to decide what
government is the established one in a State." _Id.,_ at 42. Over the
following century, this limited holding metamorphosed into the sweeping
assertion that "[v]iolation of the great guaranty of a republican form of
government in States cannot be challenged in the courts." _Colegrove v.
Green,_ 328 U.S. 549, 556, 66 S.Ct. 1198, 1201, 90 L.Ed. 1432 (1946)
(plurality opinion).

82

This view has not always been accepted. In a group of cases decided before the
holding of _Luther_ was elevated into a general rule of nonjusticiability, the
Court addressed the merits of claims founded on the Guarantee Clause without
any suggestion that the claims were not justiciable. See _Kies v. Lowrey,_ 199
U.S. 233, 239, 26 S.Ct. 27, 29, 50 L.Ed. 167 (1905); _Forsyth v. Hammond,_ 166
U.S. 506, 519, 17 S.Ct. 665, 670, 41 L.Ed. 1095 (1897); _In re Duncan,_ 139
U.S. 449, 461-462, 11 S.Ct. 573, 577, 35 L.Ed. 219 (1891); _Minor v.
Happersett,_ 21 Wall. 162, 175-176, 22 L.Ed. 627 (1875). See also _Plessy v.
Ferguson,_ 163 U.S. 537, 563-564, 16 S.Ct. 1138, 1148, 41 L.Ed. 256 (1896)
(Harlan, J., dissenting) (racial segregation "inconsistent with the guarantee
given by the Constitution to each State of a republican form of government").

83

More recently, the Court has suggested that perhaps not all claims under the
Guarantee Clause present nonjusticiable political questions. See _Reynolds v.
Sims,_ 377 U.S. 533, 582, 84 S.Ct. 1362, 1392, 12 L.Ed.2d 506 (1964) ("some
questions raised under the Guarantee Clause are nonjusticiable"). Contemporary
commentators have likewise suggested that courts should address the merits of
such claims, at least in some circumstances. See, _e.g.,_ L. Tribe, American
Constitutional Law 398 (2d ed. 1988); J. Ely, Democracy and Distrust: A Theory
of Judicial Review 118, n., 122-123 (1980); W. Wiecek, The Guarantee Clause of
the U.S. Constitution 287-289, 300 (1972); Merritt, 88 Colum.L.Rev., at 70-78;
Bonfield, The Guarantee Clause of Article IV, Section 4: A Study in
Constitutional Desuetude, 46 Minn.L.Rev. 513, 560-565 (1962).

84

We need not resolve this difficult question today. Even if we assume that
petitioners' claim is justiciable, neither the monetary incentives provided by
the Act nor the possibility that a State's waste producers may find themselves
excluded from the disposal sites of another State can reasonably be said to
deny any State a republican form of government. As we have seen, these two
incentives represent permissible conditional exercises of Congress' authority
under the Spending and Commerce Clauses respectively, in forms that have now
grown commonplace. Under each, Congress offers the States a legitimate choice
rather than issuing an unavoidable command. The States thereby retain the
ability to set their legislative agendas; state government officials remain
accountable to the local electorate. The twin threats imposed by the first two
challenged provisions of the Act--that New York may miss out on a share of
federal spending or that those generating radioactive waste within New York
may lose out-of-state disposal outlets--do not pose any realistic risk of
altering the form or the method of functioning of New York's government. Thus
even indulging the assumption that the Guarantee Clause provides a basis upon
which a State or its subdivisions may sue to enjoin the enforcement of a
federal statute, petitioners have not made out such a claim in this case.

VI

85

Having determined that the take title provision exceeds the powers of
Congress, we must consider whether it is severable from the rest of the Act.

86

"The standard for determining the severability of an unconstitutional
provision is well established: Unless it is evident that the Legislature would
not have enacted those provisions which are within its power, independently of
that which is not, the invalid part may be dropped if what is left is fully
operative as a law." _Alaska Airlines, Inc. v. Brock,_ 480 U.S. 678, 684, 107
S.Ct. 1476, 1480, 94 L.Ed.2d 661 (1987) (internal quotation marks omitted).
While the Act itself contains no statement of whether its provisions are
severable, "[i]n the absence of a severability clause, . . . Congress' silence
is just that--silence--and does not raise a presumption against severability."
_Id.,_ at 686, 107 S.Ct., at 1481. Common sense suggests that where Congress
has enacted a statutory scheme for an obvious purpose, and where Congress has
included a series of provisions operating as incentives to achieve that
purpose, the invalidation of one of the incentives should not ordinarily cause
Congress' overall intent to be frustrated. As the Court has observed, "it is
not to be presumed that the legislature was legislating for the mere sake of
imposing penalties, but the penalties . . . were simply in aid of the main
purpose of the statute. They may fail, and still the great body of the statute
have operative force, and the force contemplated by the legislature in its
enactment." _Reagan v. Farmers' Loan & Trust Co.,_ 154 U.S. 362, 396, 14 S.Ct.
1047, 1054, 38 L.Ed. 1014 (1894). See also _United States v. Jackson,_ 390
U.S. 570, 585-586, 88 S.Ct. 1209, 1218, 20 L.Ed.2d 138 (1968).

87

It is apparent in light of these principles that the take title provision may
be severed without doing violence to the rest of the Act. The Act is still
operative and it still serves Congress' objective of encouraging the States to
attain local or regional self-sufficiency in the disposal of low level
radioactive waste. It still includes two incentives that coax the States along
this road. A State whose radioactive waste generators are unable to gain
access to disposal sites in other States may encounter considerable internal
pressure to provide for the disposal of waste, even without the prospect of
taking title. The sited regional compacts need not accept New York's waste
after the seven-year transition period expires, so any burden caused by New
York's failure to secure a disposal site will not be borne by the residents of
other States. The purpose of the Act is not defeated by the invalidation of
the take title provision, so we may leave the remainder of the Act in force.

VII

88

Some truths are so basic that, like the air around us, they are easily
overlooked. Much of the Constitution is concerned with setting forth the form
of our government, and the courts have traditionally invalidated measures
deviating from that form. The result may appear "formalistic" in a given case
to partisans of the measure at issue, because such measures are typically the
product of the era's perceived necessity. But the Constitution protects us
from our own best intentions: It divides power among sovereigns and among
branches of government precisely so that we may resist the temptation to
concentrate power in one location as an expedient solution to the crisis of
the day. The shortage of disposal sites for radioactive waste is a pressing
national problem, but a judiciary that licensed extra-constitutional
government with each issue of comparable gravity would, in the long run, be
far worse.

89

States are not mere political subdivisions of the United States. State
governments are neither regional offices nor administrative agencies of the
Federal Government. The positions occupied by state officials appear nowhere
on the Federal Government's most detailed organizational chart. The
Constitution instead "leaves to the several States a residuary and inviolable
sovereignty," The Federalist No. 39, p. 245 (C. Rossiter ed. 1961), reserved
explicitly to the States by the Tenth Amendment.

90

Whatever the outer limits of that sovereignty may be, one thing is clear: The
Federal Government may not compel the States to enact or administer a federal
regulatory program. The Constitution permits both the Federal Government and
the States to enact legislation regarding the disposal of low level
radioactive waste. The Constitution enables the Federal Government to pre-empt
state regulation contrary to federal interests, and it permits the Federal
Government to hold out incentives to the States as a means of encouraging them
to adopt suggested regulatory schemes. It does not, however, authorize
Congress simply to direct the States to provide for the disposal of the
radioactive waste generated within their borders. While there may be many
constitutional methods of achieving regional self-sufficiency in radioactive
waste disposal, the method Congress has chosen is not one of them. The
judgment of the Court of Appeals is accordingly

91

_Affirmed in part and reversed in part._

92

Justice WHITE, with whom Justice BLACKMUN and Justice STEVENS join, concurring
in part and dissenting in part.

93

The Court today affirms the constitutionality of two facets of the Low-Level
Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments Act of 1985 (1985 Act), Pub.L. 99-240, 99
Stat. 1842, 42 U.S.C. ยง 2021b _et seq._ These provisions include the monetary
incentives from surcharges collected by States with low-level radioactive
waste storage sites and rebated by the Secretary of Energy to States in
compliance with the Act's deadlines for achieving regional or in-state
disposal, see ยงยง 2021e(d)(2)(A) and 2021e(d)(2)(B)(iv), and the "access
incentives," which deny access to disposal sites for States that fail to meet
certain deadlines for low-level radioactive waste disposal management. ยง
2021e(e)(2). The Court strikes down and severs a third component of the 1985
Act, the "take title" provision, which requires a noncomplying State to take
title to or to assume liability for its low-level radioactive waste if it
fails to provide for the disposal of such waste by January 1, 1996. ยง
2021e(d)(2)(C). The Court deems this last provision unconstitutional under
principles of federalism. Because I believe the Court has mischaracterized the
essential inquiry, misanalyzed the inquiry it has chosen to undertake, and
undervalued the effect the seriousness of this public policy problem should
have on the constitutionality of the take title provision, I can only join
Parts III-A and III-B, and I respectfully dissent from the rest of its opinion
and the judgment reversing in part the judgment of the Court of Appeals.

94

* My disagreement with the Court's analysis begins at the basic descriptive level of how the legislation at issue in this case came to be enacted. The Court goes some way toward setting out the bare facts, but its omissions cast the statutory context of the take title provision in the wrong light. To read the Court's version of events, see _ante,_ at 2-3, one would think that Congress was the sole proponent of a solution to the Nation's low-level radioactive waste problem. Not so. The Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act of 1980 (1980 Act), Pub.L. 96-573, 94 Stat. 3347, and its amendatory Act of 1985, resulted from the efforts of state leaders to achieve a state-based set of remedies to the waste problem. They sought not federal pre-emption or intervention, but rather congressional sanction of interstate compromises they had reached.

95

The two signal events in 1979 that precipitated movement toward legislation
were the temporary closing of the Nevada disposal site in July 1979, after
several serious transportation-related incidents, and the temporary shutting
of the Washington disposal site because of similar transportation and
packaging problems in October 1979. At that time the facility in Barnwell,
South Carolina, received approximately three-quarters of the Nation's low-
level radioactive waste, and the Governor ordered a 50 percent reduction in
the amount his State's plant would accept for disposal. National Governors'
Association Task Force on Low-Level Radioactive Waste Disposal, Low-Level
Waste: A Program for Action 3 (Nov. 1980) (hereinafter A Program for Action).
The Governor of Washington threatened to shut down the Hanford, Washington,
facility entirely by 1982 unless "some meaningful progress occurs toward"
development of regional solutions to the waste disposal problem. _Id.,_ at 4,
n. Only three sites existed in the country for the disposal of low-level
radioactive waste, and the "sited" States confronted the undesirable
alternatives either of continuing to be the dumping grounds for the entire
Nation's low-level waste or of eliminating or reducing in a constitutional
manner the amount of waste accepted for disposal.

96

The imminence of a crisis in low-level radioactive waste management cannot be
overstated. In December 1979, the National Governors' Association convened an
eight-member task force to coordinate policy proposals on behalf of the
States. See Status of Interstate Compacts for the Disposal of Low-Level
Radioactive Waste: Hearing before the Senate Committee on the Judiciary, 98th
Cong., 1st Sess., 8 (1983). In May 1980, the State Planning Council on
Radioactive Waste Management submitted the following unanimous recommendation
to President Carter: "The national policy of the United States on low-level
radioactive waste shall be that every State is responsible for the disposal of
the low-level radioactive waste generated by nondefense related activities
within its boundaries and that States are authorized to enter into interstate
compacts, as necessary, for the purpose of carrying out this responsibility."
126 Cong.Rec. 20135 (1980).

97

This recommendation was adopted by the National Governors' Association a few
months later. See A Program for Action 6-7; H.R.Rep. No. 99-314, pt. 2, p. 18
(1985). The Governors recognized that the Federal Government could assert its
preeminence in achieving a solution to this problem, but requested instead
that Congress oversee state-developed regional solutions. Accordingly, the
Governors' Task Force urged that "each state should accept primary
responsibility for the safe disposal of low-level radioactive waste generated
within its borders" and that "the states should pursue a regional approach to
the low-level waste disposal problem." A Program for Action 6.

98

The Governors went further, however, in recommending that "Congress should
authorize the states to enter into interstate compacts to establish regional
disposal sites" and that "[s]uch authorization should include the power to
exclude waste generated outside the region from the regional disposal site."
_Id.,_ at 7. The Governors had an obvious incentive in urging Congress not to
add more coercive measures to the legislation should the States fail to
comply, but they nevertheless anticipated that Congress might eventually have
to take stronger steps to ensure compliance with long-range planning deadlines
for low-level radioactive waste management. Accordingly, the Governors' Task
Force

99

"recommend[ed] that Congress defer consideration of sanctions to compel the
establishment of new disposal sites until at least two years after the
enactment of compact consent legislation. States are already confronting the
diminishing capacity of present sites and an unequivocal political warning
from those states' Governors. If at the end of the two-year period states have
not responded effectively, or if problems still exist, stronger federal action
may be necessary. But until that time, Congress should confine its role to
removing obstacles and allow the states a reasonable chance to solve the
problem themselves." _Id.,_ at 8-9.

100

Such concerns would have been mooted had Congress enacted a "federal"
solution, which the Senate considered in July 1980. See S. 2189, 96th Cong.,
2d Sess. (1980); S.Rep. No. 96-548 (1980) (detailing legislation calling for
federal study, oversight, and management of radioactive waste). This "federal"
solution, however, was opposed by one of the sited State's Senators, who
introduced an amendment to adopt and implement the recommendations of the
State Planning Council on Radioactive Waste Management. See 126 Cong.Rec.
20136 (1980) (statement of Sen. Thurmond). The "state-based" solution carried
the day, and as enacted, the 1980 Act announced the "policy of the Federal
Government that . . . each State is responsible for providing for the
availability of capacity either within or outside the State for the disposal
of low-level radioactive waste generated within its borders." Pub.L. 96-573, ยง
4(a)(1), 94 Stat. 3348. This Act further authorized States to "enter into such
compacts as may be necessary to provide for the establishment and operation of
regional disposal facilities for low-level radioactive waste," ยง 4(a)(2)(A),
compacts to which Congress would have to give its consent. ยง 4(a)(2)(B). The
1980 Act also provided that, beginning on January 1, 1986, an approved compact
could reserve access to its disposal facilities for those States which had
joined that particular regional compact. _Ibid._

101

As well described by one of the _amici,_ the attempts by States to enter into
compacts and to gain congressional approval sparked a new round of political
squabbling between elected officials from unsited States, who generally
opposed ratification of the compacts that were being formed, and their
counterparts from the sited States, who insisted that the promises made in the
1980 Act be honored. See Brief for American Federation of Labor and Congress
of Industrial Organizations as _Amicus Curiae_ 12-14. In its effort to keep
the States at the forefront of the policy amendment process, the National
Governors' Association organized more than a dozen meetings to achieve a state
consensus. See H. Brown, The Low-Level Waste Handbook: A User's Guide to the
Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments Act of 1985, p. iv (Nov. 1986)
(describing "the states' desire to influence any revisions of the 1980 Act").

102

These discussions were not merely academic. The sited States grew increasingly
and justifiably frustrated by the seeming inaction of unsited States in
meeting the projected actions called for in the 1980 Act. Thus, as the end of
1985 approached, the sited States viewed the January 1, 1986 deadline
established in the 1980 Act as a "drop-dead" date, on which the regional
compacts could begin excluding the entry of out-of-region waste. See 131
Cong.Rec. 35203 (1985). Since by this time the three disposal facilities
operating in 1980 were still the only such plants accepting low-level
radioactive waste, the unsited States perceived a very serious danger if the
three existing facilities actually carried out their threat to restrict access
to the waste generated solely within their respective compact regions.

103

A movement thus arose to achieve a compromise between the sited and the
unsited States, in which the sited States agreed to continue accepting waste
in exchange for the imposition of stronger measures to guarantee compliance
with the unsited States' assurances that they would develop alternate disposal
facilities. As Representative Derrick explained, the compromise 1985
legislation "gives nonsited States more time to develop disposal sites, but
also establishes a very firm timetable and sanctions for failure to live up
[to] the agreement." _Id.,_ at 35207. Representative Markey added that "[t]his
compromise became the basis for our amendments to the Low-Level Radioactive
Waste Policy Act of 1980. In the process of drafting such amendments, various
concessions have been made by all sides in an effort to arrive at a bill which
all parties could accept." _Id.,_ at 35205. The bill that in large measure
became the 1985 Act "represent[ed] the diligent negotiating undertaken by" the
National Governors' Association and "embodied" the "fundamentals of their
settlement." _Id.,_ at 35204 (statement of Rep. Udall). In sum, the 1985 Act
was very much the product of cooperative federalism, in which the States
bargained among themselves to achieve compromises for Congress to sanction.

104

There is no need to resummarize the essentials of the 1985 legislation, which
the Court does _ante,_ at 151-154. It does, however, seem critical to
emphasize what is accurately described in one _amicus_ brief as the assumption
by Congress of "the role of arbiter of disputes among the several States."
Brief for Rocky Mountain Low-Level Radioactive Waste Compact et al. as _Amici
Curiae_ 9\. Unlike legislation that directs action from the Federal Government
to the States, the 1980 and 1985 Acts reflected hard-fought agreements among
States as refereed by Congress. The distinction is key, and the Court's
failure properly to characterize this legislation ultimately affects its
analysis of the take title provision's constitutionality.

II

105

To justify its holding that the take title provision contravenes the
Constitution, the Court posits that "[i]n this provision, Congress has crossed
the line distinguishing encouragement from coercion." _Ante,_ at 175. Without
attempting to understand properly the take title provision's place in the
interstate bargaining process, the Court isolates the measure analytically and
proceeds to dissect it in a syllogistic fashion. The Court candidly begins
with an argument respondents do _not_ make: "that the Constitution would not
permit Congress simply to transfer radioactive waste from generators to state
governments." "Such a forced transfer," it continues, "standing alone, would
in principle be no different than a congressionally compelled subsidy from
state governments to radioactive waste producers." _Ibid._ Since this is _not_
an argument respondents make, one naturally wonders why the Court builds its
analysis that the take title provision is unconstitutional around this opening
premise. But having carefully built its straw man, the Court proceeds
impressively to knock him down. "As we have seen," the Court teaches, "the
Constitution does not empower Congress to subject state governments to this
type of instruction." _Ante,_ at 176.

106

Curiously absent from the Court's analysis is any effort to place the take
title provision within the overall context of the legislation. As the
discussion in Part I of this opinion suggests, the 1980 and 1985 statutes were
enacted against a backdrop of national concern over the availability of
additional low-level radioactive waste disposal facilities. Congress could
have pre-empted the field by directly regulating the disposal of this waste
pursuant to its powers under the Commerce and Spending Clauses, but instead it
_unanimously_ assented to the States' request for congressional ratification
of agreements to which they had acceded. See 131 Cong.Rec. 35252 (1985);
_id.,_ at 38425. As the floor statements of Members of Congress reveal, see
_supra,_ at 193-194, the States wished to take the lead in achieving a
solution to this problem and agreed among themselves to the various incentives
and penalties implemented by Congress to insure adherence to the various
deadlines and goals.1 The chief executives of the States proposed this
approach, and I am unmoved by the Court's vehemence in taking away Congress'
authority to sanction a recalcitrant unsited State now that New York has
reaped the benefits of the sited States' concessions.

107

* In my view, New York's actions subsequent to enactment of the 1980 and 1985 Acts fairly indicate its approval of the interstate agreement process embodied in those laws within the meaning of Art. I, ยง 10, cl. 3, of the Constitution, which provides that "[n]o State shall, without the Consent of Congress, . . . enter into any Agreement or Compact with another State." First, the States--including New York--worked through their Governors to petition Congress for the 1980 and 1985 Acts. As I have attempted to demonstrate, these statutes are best understood as the products of collective state action, rather than as impositions placed on States by the Federal Government. Second, New York acted in compliance with the requisites of both statutes in key respects, thus signifying its assent to the agreement achieved among the States as codified in these laws. After enactment of the 1980 Act and pursuant to its provision in ยง 4(a)(2), 94 Stat. 3348, New York entered into compact negotiations with several other northeastern States before withdrawing from them to "go it alone." Indeed, in 1985, as the January 1, 1986 deadline crisis approached and Congress considered the 1985 legislation that is the subject of this lawsuit, the Deputy Commissioner for Policy and Planning of the New York State Energy Office testified before Congress that "New York State supports the efforts of Mr. Udall and the members of this Subcommittee to resolve the current impasse over Congressional consent to the proposed LLRW compacts and provide interim access for states and regions without sites. _New York State has been participating with the National Governors' Association and the other large states and compact commissions in an effort to further refine the recommended approach in HR 1083 and reach a consensus between all groups._ " See Low-Level Waste Legislation: Hearings on H.R. 862, H.R. 1046, H.R. 1083, and H.R. 1267 before the Subcommittee on Energy and the Environment of the House Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, 99th Cong., 1st Sess., 197 (1985) (testimony of Charles Guinn) (emphasis added).

108

Based on the assumption that "other states will [not] continue indefinitely to
provide access to facilities adequate for the permanent disposal of low-level
radioactive waste generated in New York," 1986 N.Y.Laws, ch. 673, ยง 2, the
State legislature enacted a law providing for a waste disposal facility to be
sited in the State. _Ibid._ This measure comported with the 1985 Act's proviso
that States which did not join a regional compact by July 1, 1986, would have
to establish an in-state waste disposal facility. See 42 U.S.C. ยง
2021e(e)(1)(A). New York also complied with another provision of the 1985 Act,
ยง 2021e(e)(1)(B), which provided that by January 1, 1988, each compact or
independent State would identify a facility location and develop a siting
plan, or contract with a sited compact for access to that region's facility.
By 1988, New York had identified five potential sites in Cortland and Allegany
Counties, but public opposition there caused the State to reconsider where to
locate its waste disposal facility. See Office of Environmental Restoration
and Waste Management, U.S. Dept. of Energy, Report to Congress in Response to
Public Law 99-240: 1990 Annual Report on Low-Level Radioactive Waste
Management Progress 32-35 (1991) (lodged with the Clerk of this Court). As it
was undertaking these initial steps to honor the interstate compromise
embodied in the 1985 Act, New York continued to take full advantage of the
import concession made by the sited States, by exporting its low-level
radioactive waste for the full 7-year extension period provided in the 1985
Act. By gaining these benefits and complying with certain of the 1985 Act's
deadlines, therefore, New York fairly evidenced its acceptance of the federal-
state arrangement--including the take title provision.

109

Although unlike the 42 States that compose the nine existing and approved
regional compacts, see Brief for United States 10, n. 19, New York has never
formalized its assent to the 1980 and 1985 statutes, our cases support the
view that New York's actions signify assent to a constitutional interstate
"agreement" for purposes of Art. I, ยง 10, cl. 3. In _Holmes v. Jennison,_ 14
Pet. 540 (1840), Chief Justice Taney stated that "[t]he word 'agreement,' does
not necessarily import any direct and express stipulation; nor is it necessary
that it should be in writing. If there is a verbal understanding to which both
parties have assented, _and upon which both are acting,_ it is an 'agreement.'
And the use of all of these terms, 'treaty,' 'agreement,' 'compact,' show that
it was the intention of the framers of the Constitution to use the broadest
and most comprehensive terms; . . . and we shall fail to execute that evident
intention, unless we give to the word 'agreement' its most extended
signification; and so apply it as to prohibit every agreement, written or
verbal, formal or informal, positive or implied, by the mutual understanding
of the parties." _Id.,_ at 572. (emphasis added). In my view, New York acted
in a manner to signify its assent to the 1985 Act's take title provision as
part of the elaborate compromise reached among the States.

110

The State should be estopped from asserting the unconstitutionality of a
provision that seeks merely to ensure that, after deriving substantial
advantages from the 1985 Act, New York in fact must live up to its bargain by
establishing an in-state low-level radioactive waste facility or assuming
liability for its failure to act. Cf. _West Virginia ex rel. Dyer v. Sims,_
341 U.S. 22, 35-36, 71 S.Ct. 557, 564, 95 L.Ed. 713 (1951), Jackson, J.,
concurring: "West Virginia officials induced sister States to contract with
her and Congress to consent to the Compact. She now attempts to read herself
out of this interstate Compact. . . . Estoppel is not often to be invoked
against a government. But West Virginia assumed a contractual obligation with
equals by permission of another government that is sovereign in the field.
_After Congress and_ _sister States had been induced to alter their positions
and bind themselves to terms of a covenant,_ West Virginia should be estopped
from repudiating her act. . . ." (Emphasis added.)

B

111

Even were New York not to be estopped from challenging the take title
provision's constitutionality, I am convinced that, seen as a term of an
agreement entered into between the several States, this measure proves to be
less constitutionally odious than the Court opines. First, the practical
effect of New York's position is that because it is unwilling to honor its
obligations to provide in-state storage facilities for its low-level
radioactive waste, _other_ States with such plants _must accept_ New York's
waste, whether they wish to or not. Otherwise, the many economically and
socially-beneficial producers of such waste in the State would have to cease
their operations. The Court's refusal to force New York to accept
responsibility for its own problem inevitably means that some other State's
sovereignty will be impinged by it being forced, for public health reasons, to
accept New York's low-level radioactive waste. I do not understand the
principle of federalism to impede the National Government from acting as
referee among the States to prohibit one from bullying another.

112

Moreover, it is utterly reasonable that, in crafting a delicate compromise
between the three overburdened States that provided low-level radioactive
waste disposal facilities and the rest of the States, Congress would have to
ratify some punitive measure as the ultimate sanction for noncompliance. The
take title provision, though surely onerous, does _not_ take effect if the
generator of the waste does not request such action, or if the State lives up
to its bargain of providing a waste disposal facility either within the State
or in another State pursuant to a regional compact arrangement or a separate
contract. See 42 U.S.C. ยง 2021e(d)(2)(C).

113

Finally, to say, as the Court does, that the incursion on state sovereignty
"cannot be ratified by the 'consent' of state officials," _ante,_ at 182, is
flatly wrong. In a case involving a congressional ratification statute to an
interstate compact, the Court upheld a provision that Tennessee and Missouri
had waived their immunity from suit. Over their objection, the Court held that
"[t]he States who are parties to the compact by accepting it _and acting under
it assume the conditions_ that Congress under the Constitution attached."
_Petty v. Tennessee-Missouri Bridge Comm'n,_ 359 U.S. 275, 281-282, 79 S.Ct.
785, 790, 3 L.Ed.2d 804 (1959) (emphasis added). In so holding, the Court
determined that a State may be found to have waived a fundamental aspect of
its sovereignty--the right to be immune from suit--in the formation of an
interstate compact even when in subsequent litigation it expressly denied its
waiver. I fail to understand the reasoning behind the Court's selective
distinctions among the various aspects of sovereignty that may and may not be
waived and do not believe these distinctions will survive close analysis in
future cases. Hard public policy choices sometimes require strong measures,
and the Court's holding, while not irremediable, essentially misunderstands
that the 1985 take title provision was part of a complex interstate agreement
about which New York should not now be permitted to complain.

III

114

The Court announces that it has no occasion to revisit such decisions as
_Gregory v. Ashcroft,_ 501 U.S. ----, 111 S.Ct. 2395, 115 L.Ed.2d 410 (1991);
_South Carolina v. Baker,_ 485 U.S. 505, 108 S.Ct. 1355, 99 L.Ed.2d 592
(1988); _Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority,_ 469 U.S. 528,
105 S.Ct. 1005, 83 L.Ed.2d 1016 (1985); _EEOC v. Wyoming,_ 460 U.S. 226, 103
S.Ct. 1054, 75 L.Ed.2d 18 (1983); and _National League of Cities v. Usery,_
426 U.S. 833, 96 S.Ct. 2465, 49 L.Ed.2d 245 (1976); see _ante,_ at 160,
because "this is not a case in which Congress has subjected a State to the
same legislation applicable to private parties." _Ibid._ Although this
statement sends the welcome signal that the Court does not intend to cut a
wide swath through our recent Tenth Amendment precedents, it nevertheless is
unpersuasive. I have several difficulties with the Court's analysis in this
respect: it builds its rule around an insupportable and illogical distinction
in the types of alleged incursions on state sovereignty; it derives its rule
from cases that do not support its analysis; it fails to apply the appropriate
tests from the cases on which it purports to base its rule; and it omits any
discussion of the most recent and pertinent test for determining the take
title provision's constitutionality.

115

The Court's distinction between a federal statute's regulation of States and
private parties for general purposes, as opposed to a regulation solely on the
activities of States, is unsupported by our recent Tenth Amendment cases. In
no case has the Court rested its holding on such a distinction. Moreover, the
Court makes no effort to explain why this purported distinction should affect
the analysis of Congress' power under general principles of federalism and the
Tenth Amendment. The distinction, facilely thrown out, is not based on any
defensible theory. Certainly one would be hard-pressed to read the spirited
exchanges between the Court and dissenting Justices in _National League of
Cities, supra,_ and in _Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority,
supra,_ as having been based on the distinction now drawn by the Court. An
incursion on state sovereignty hardly seems more constitutionally acceptable
if the federal statute that "commands" specific action also applies to private
parties. The alleged diminution in state authority over its own affairs is not
any less because the federal mandate restricts the activities of private
parties.

116

Even were such a distinction to be logically sound, the Court's "anti-
commandeering" principle cannot persuasively be read as springing from the two
cases cited for the proposition, _Hodel v. Virginia Surface Mining &
Reclamation Assn., Inc.,_ 452 U.S. 264, 288, 101 S.Ct. 2352, 2366, 69 L.Ed.2d
1 (1981), and _FERC v. Mississippi,_ 456 U.S. 742, 761-762, 102 S.Ct. 2126,
2138-2139, 72 L.Ed.2d 532 (1982). The Court purports to draw support for its
rule against Congress "commandeer[ing]" state legislative processes from a
solitary statement in dictum in _Hodel._ See _ante,_ at 161: "As an initial
matter, Congress may not simply 'commandee[r] the legislative processes of the
States by directly compelling them to enact and enforce a federal regulatory
program.' " (quoting _Hodel, supra,_ 452 U.S. at 288, 101 S.Ct., at 2366).
That statement was not necessary to the decision in _Hodel,_ which involved
the question whether the Tenth Amendment interfered with Congress' authority
to pre-empt a field of activity that could also be subject to state regulation
and not whether a federal statute could dictate certain actions by States; the
language about "commandeer[ing]" States was classic dicta. In holding that a
federal statute regulating the activities of private coal mine operators was
constitutional, the Court observed that "[i]t would . . . be a radical
departure from long-established precedent for this Court to hold that the
Tenth Amendment prohibits Congress from displacing state police power laws
regulating private activity." 452 U.S., at 292, 101 S.Ct., at 2368.

117

The Court also claims support for its rule from our decision in _FERC,_ and
quotes a passage from that case in which we stated that " 'this Court never
has sanctioned explicitly a federal command to the States to promulgate and
enforce laws and regulations.' " _Ante,_ at 161 (quoting 456 U.S., at 761-762,
102 S.Ct., at 2138-2139). In so reciting, the Court extracts from the relevant
passage in a manner that subtly alters the Court's meaning. In full, the
passage reads: " _While_ this Court never has sanctioned explicitly a federal
command to the States to promulgate and enforce laws and regulations, cf. _EPA
v. Brown,_ 431 U.S. 99, 97 S.Ct. 1635, 52 L.Ed.2d 166 (1977), _there are
instances where the Court has upheld federal statutory structures that in
effect directed state decisionmakers to take or to refrain from taking certain
actions._ " _Ibid._ (citing _Fry v. United States,_ 421 U.S. 542, 95 S.Ct.
1792, 44 L.Ed.2d 363 (1975) (emphasis added).2 The phrase highlighted by the
Court merely means that we have not had the occasion to address whether
Congress may "command" the States to enact a certain law, and as I have argued
in Parts I and II of this opinion, this case does not raise that issue.
Moreover, it should go without saying that the _absence_ of any on-point
precedent from this Court has no bearing on the question whether Congress has
properly exercised its constitutional authority under Article I. Silence by
this Court on a subject is not authority for anything.

118

The Court can scarcely rest on a distinction between federal laws of general
applicability and those ostensibly directed solely at the activities of
States, therefore, when the decisions from which it derives the rule not only
made no such distinction, but validated federal statutes that constricted
state sovereignty in ways greater than or similar to the take title provision
at issue in this case. As _Fry, Hodel,_ and _FERC_ make clear, our precedents
prior to _Garcia_ upheld provisions in federal statutes that directed States
to undertake certain actions. "[I]t cannot be constitutionally determinative
that the federal regulation is likely to move the States to act in a given
way," we stated in _FERC,_ "or even to 'coerc[e] the States' into assuming a
regulatory role by affecting their 'freedom to make decisions in areas of
"integral governmental functions." ' " 456 U.S., at 766, 102 S.Ct., at 2141. I
thus am unconvinced that either _Hodel_ or _FERC_ supports the rule announced
by the Court.

119

And if those cases do stand for the proposition that in certain circumstances
Congress may not dictate that the States take specific actions, it would seem
appropriate to apply the test stated in _FERC_ for determining those
circumstances. The crucial threshold inquiry in that case was whether the
subject matter was pre-emptible by Congress. See 456 U.S., at 765, 102 S.Ct.,
at 2140. "If Congress can require a state administrative body to consider
proposed regulations as a condition to its continued involvement _in a pre-
emptible field_ --and we hold today that it can there is nothing
unconstitutional about Congress' requiring certain procedural minima as that
body goes about undertaking its tasks." _Id.,_ at 771, 102 S.Ct., at 2143
(emphasis added). The _FERC_ Court went on to explain that if Congress is
legislating in a pre-emptible field--as the Court concedes it was doing here,
see _ante,_ at 173-174--the proper test before our decision in _Garcia_ was to
assess whether the alleged intrusions on state sovereignty "do not threaten
the States' 'separate and independent existence,' _Lane County v. Oregon,_ 7
Wall. 71, 76 [19 L.Ed. 101] (1869); _Coyle v. Oklahoma,_ 221 U.S. 559, 580 [31
S.Ct. 688, 695, 55 L.Ed. 853] (1911), and do not impair the ability of the
States 'to function effectively in a federal system.' _Fry v. United States,_
421 U.S., at 547, n. 7 [95 S.Ct., at 1795, n. 7]; _National League of Cities
v. Usery,_ 426 U.S., at 852 [96 S.Ct., at 2474]," _FERC, supra,_ 456 U.S., at
765-766, 102 S.Ct., at 2144. On neither score does the take title provision
raise constitutional problems. It certainly does not threaten New York's
independent existence nor impair its ability to function effectively in the
system, all the more so since the provision was enacted pursuant to
compromises reached among state leaders and then ratified by Congress.

120

It is clear, therefore, that even under the precedents selectively chosen by
the Court, its analysis of the take title provision's constitutionality in
this case falls far short of being persuasive. I would also submit, in this
connection, that the Court's attempt to carve out a doctrinal distinction for
statutes that purport solely to regulate State activities is especially
unpersuasive after _Garcia._ It is true that in that case we considered
whether a federal statute of general applicability--the Fair Labor Standards
Act--applied to state transportation entities but our most recent statements
have explained the appropriate analysis in a more general manner. Just last
Term, for instance, Justice O'CONNOR wrote for the Court that "[w]e are
constrained in our ability to consider the limits that the state-federal
balance places on Congress' powers under the Commerce Clause. See _Garcia v.
San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority,_ 469 U.S. 528, 105 S.Ct. 1005, 83
L.Ed.2d 1016 (1985) (declining to review limitations placed on Congress'
Commerce Clause powers by our federal system)." _Gregory v. Ashcroft,_ 501
U.S. 464, 111 S.Ct. 2395, 2413, 115 L.Ed.2d 410 (1991). Indeed, her opinion
went on to state that "this Court in _Garcia_ has left primarily to the
_political process_ the protection of the States against intrusive exercises
of Congress' Commerce Clause powers." _Ibid._ (emphasis added).

121

Rather than seek guidance from _FERC_ and _Hodel,_ therefore, the more
appropriate analysis should flow from _Garcia,_ even if this case does not
involve a congressional law generally applicable to both States and private
parties. In _Garcia,_ we stated the proper inquiry: "[W]e are convinced that
the fundamental limitation that the constitutional scheme imposes on the
Commerce Clause to protect the 'States as States' is one of process rather
than one of result. Any substantive restraint on the exercise of Commerce
Clause powers must find its justification in the procedural nature of this
basic limitation, and it must be tailored to compensate for possible failings
in the national political process rather than to dictate a 'sacred province of
state autonomy.' " 469 U.S., at 554, 105 S.Ct., at 1019 (quoting _EEOC v.
Wyoming,_ 460 U.S., at 236, 103 S.Ct., at 1060). Where it addresses this
aspect of respondents' argument, see _ante,_ at 180-183, the Court tacitly
concedes that a failing of the political process cannot be shown in this case
because it refuses to rebut the unassailable arguments that the States were
well able to look after themselves in the legislative process that culminated
in the 1985 Act's passage. Indeed, New York acknowledges that its
"congressional delegation participated in the drafting and enactment of both
the 1980 and the 1985 Acts." Pet. for Cert. in No. 91-543, p. 7. The Court
rejects this process-based argument by resorting to generalities and
platitudes about the purpose of federalism being to protect individual rights.

122

Ultimately, I suppose, the entire structure of our federal constitutional
government can be traced to an interest in establishing checks and balances to
prevent the exercise of tyranny against individuals. But these fears seem
extremely far distant to me in a situation such as this. We face a crisis of
national proportions in the disposal of low-level radioactive waste, and
Congress has acceded to the wishes of the States by permitting local
decisionmaking rather than imposing a solution from Washington. New York
itself participated and supported passage of this legislation at both the
gubernatorial and federal representative levels, and then enacted state laws
specifically to comply with the deadlines and timetables agreed upon by the
States in the 1985 Act. For me, the Court's civics lecture has a decidedly
hollow ring at a time when action, rather than rhetoric, is needed to solve a
national problem.3

IV

123

Though I disagree with the Court's conclusion that the take title provision is
unconstitutional, I do not read its opinion to preclude Congress from adopting
a similar measure through its powers under the Spending or Commerce Clauses.
The Court makes clear that its objection is to the alleged "commandeer[ing]"
quality of the take title provision. See _ante,_ at 175. As its discussion of
the surcharge and rebate incentives reveals, see _ante,_ at 171-172, the
spending power offers a means of enacting a take title provision under the
Court's standards. Congress could, in other words, condition the payment of
funds on the State's willingness to take title if it has not already provided
a waste disposal facility. Under the scheme upheld in this case, for example,
monies collected in the surcharge provision might be withheld or disbursed
depending on a State's willingness to take title to or otherwise accept
responsibility for the low-level radioactive waste generated in state after
the statutory deadline for establishing its own waste disposal facility has
passed. See _ibid._ ; _South Dakota v. Dole,_ 483 U.S. 203, 208-209, 107 S.Ct.
2793, 2796, 97 L.Ed.2d 171 (1987); _Massachusetts v. United States,_ 435 U.S.
444, 461, 98 S.Ct. 1153, 1164, 55 L.Ed.2d 403 (1978).

124

Similarly, should a State fail to establish a waste disposal facility by the
appointed deadline (under the statute as presently drafted, January 1, 1996, ยง
2021e(d)(2)(C)), Congress has the power pursuant to the Commerce Clause to
regulate directly the producers of the waste. See _ante,_ at 174. Thus, as I
read it, Congress could amend the statute to say that if a State fails to meet
the January 1, 1996 deadline for achieving a means of waste disposal, and has
not taken title to the waste, no low-level radioactive waste may be shipped
out of the State of New York. See, _e.g.,_ _Hodel,_ 452 U.S., at 288, 101
S.Ct., at 2366. As the legislative history of the 1980 and 1985 Acts
indicates, faced with the choice of federal pre-emptive regulation and self-
regulation pursuant to interstate agreement with congressional consent and
ratification, the States decisively chose the latter. This background suggests
that the threat of federal pre-emption may suffice to induce States to accept
responsibility for failing to meet critical time deadlines for solving their
low-level radioactive waste disposal problems, especially if that federal
intervention also would strip state and local authorities of any input in
locating sites for low-level radioactive waste disposal facilities. And of
course, should Congress amend the statute to meet the Court's objection and a
State refuse to act, the National Legislature will have ensured at least a
federal solution to the waste management problem.

125

Finally, our precedents leave open the possibility that Congress may create
federal rights of action in the generators of low-level radioactive waste
against persons acting under color of state law for their failure to meet
certain functions designated in federal-state programs. Thus, we have upheld ยง
1983 suits to enforce certain rights created by statutes enacted pursuant to
the Spending Clause, see, _e.g., Wilder v. Virginia Hospital Assn.,_ 496 U.S.
498, 110 S.Ct. 2510, 110 L.Ed.2d 455 (1990); _Wright v. Roanoke Redevelopment
and Housing Authority,_ 479 U.S. 418, 107 S.Ct. 766, 93 L.Ed.2d 781 (1987),
although Congress must be cautious in spelling out the federal right clearly
and distinctly, see, _e.g., Suter v. Artist M,_ 503 U.S. ----, 112 S.Ct. 1360,
118 L.Ed.2d 1 (1992) (not permitting a ยง 1983 suit under a Spending Clause
statute when the ostensible federal right created was too vague and
amorphous). In addition to compensating injured parties for the State's
failure to act, the exposure to liability established by such suits also
potentially serves as an inducement to compliance with the program mandate.

V

126

The ultimate irony of the decision today is that in its formalistically rigid
obeisance to "federalism," the Court gives Congress fewer incentives to defer
to the wishes of state officials in achieving local solutions to local
problems. This legislation was a classic example of Congress acting as arbiter
among the States in their attempts to accept responsibility for managing a
problem of grave import. The States urged the National Legislature not to
impose from Washington a solution to the country's low-level radioactive waste
management problems. Instead, they sought a reasonable level of local and
regional autonomy consistent with Art. I, ยง 10, cl. 3, of the Constitution. By
invalidating the measure designed to ensure compliance for recalcitrant
States, such as New York, the Court upsets the delicate compromise achieved
among the States and forces Congress to erect several additional formalistic
hurdles to clear before achieving exactly the same objective. Because the
Court's justifications for undertaking this step are unpersuasive to me, I
respectfully dissent.

127

The notion that Congress does not have the power to issue "a simple command to
state governments to implement legislation enacted by Congress," _ante,_ at
176, is incorrect and unsound. There is no such limitation in the
Constitution. The Tenth Amendment1 surely does not impose any limit on
Congress' exercise of the powers delegated to it by Article I.2 Nor does the
structure of the constitutional order or the values of federalism mandate such
a formal rule. To the contrary, the Federal Government directs state
governments in many realms. The Government regulates state-operated railroads,
state school systems, state prisons, state elections, and a host of other
state functions. Similarly, there can be no doubt that, in time of war,
Congress could either draft soldiers itself or command the States to supply
their quotas of troops. I see no reason why Congress may not also command the
States to enforce federal water and air quality standards or federal standards
for the disposition of low-level radioactive wastes.

128

The Constitution gives this Court the power to resolve controversies between
the States. Long before Congress enacted pollution-control legislation, this
Court crafted a body of " 'interstate common law,' " _Illinois v. City of
Milwaukee,_ 406 U.S. 91, 106, 92 S.Ct. 1385, 1394, 31 L.Ed.2d 712 (1972), to
govern disputes between States involving interstate waters. See _Arkansas v.
Oklahoma,_ 503 U.S. ----, ---- - ----, 112 S.Ct. 1046, 1052-1053, 117 L.Ed.2d
239 (1992). In such contexts, we have not hesitated to direct States to
undertake specific actions. For example, we have "impose[d] on States an
affirmative duty to take reasonable steps to conserve and augment the water
supply of an interstate stream." _Colorado v. New Mexico,_ 459 U.S. 176, 185,
103 S.Ct. 539, 546, 74 L.Ed.2d 348 (1982) (citing _Wyoming v. Colorado,_ 259
U.S. 419, 42 S.Ct. 552, 66 L.Ed. 999 (1922)). Thus, we unquestionably have the
power to command an upstate stream that is polluting the waters of a
downstream State to adopt appropriate regulations to implement a federal
statutory command.

129

With respect to the problem presented by the case at hand, if litigation
should develop between States that have joined a compact, we would surely have
the power to grant relief in the form of specific enforcement of the take
title provision.3 Indeed, even if the statute had never been passed, if one
State's radioactive waste created a nuisance that harmed its neighbors, it
seems clear that we would have had the power to command the offending State to
take remedial action. Cf. _Illinois v. City of Milwaukee._ If this Court has
such authority, surely Congress has similar authority.

130

For these reasons, as well as those set forth by Justice WHITE, I respectfully
dissent.

1

As Senator McClure pointed out, "the actions taken in the Committee on Energy
and Natural Resources met the objections and the objectives of the States
point by point; and I want to underscore what the Senator from Louisiana has
indicated--that it is important that we have real milestones. It is important
to note that the discussions between staffs and principals have produced a[n]
agreement that does have some real teeth in it at some points." 131 Cong.Rec.
38415 (1985).

2

It is true that under the majority's approach, _Fry_ is distinguishable
because it involved a statute generally applicable to both state governments
and private parties. The law at issue in that case was the Economic
Stabilization Act of 1970, which imposed wage and salary limitations on
private and state workers alike. In _Fry,_ the Court upheld this statute's
application to the States over a Tenth Amendment challenge. In my view, _Fry_
perfectly captures the weakness of the majority's distinction, because the law
upheld in that case involved a far more pervasive intrusion on state
sovereignty--the authority of state governments to pay salaries and wages to
its employees below the federal minimum--than the take title provision at
issue here.

3

With selective quotations from the era in which the Constitution was adopted,
the majority attempts to bolster its holding that the take title provision is
tantamount to federal "commandeering" of the States. In view of the many Tenth
Amendment cases decided over the past two decades in which resort to the kind
of historical analysis generated in the majority opinion was not deemed
necessary, I do not read the majority's many invocations of history to be
anything other than elaborate window-dressing. Certainly nowhere does the
majority announce that its rule is compelled by an understanding of what the
Framers may have thought about statutes of the type at issue here. Moreover, I
would observe that, while its quotations add a certain flavor to the opinion,
the majority's historical analysis has a distinctly wooden quality. One would
not know from reading the majority's account, for instance, that the nature of
federal-state relations changed fundamentally after the Civil War. That
conflict produced in its wake a tremendous expansion in the scope of the
Federal Government's law-making authority, so much so that the persons who
helped to found the Republic would scarcely have recognized the many added
roles the National Government assumed for itself. Moreover, the majority fails
to mention the New Deal era, in which the Court recognized the enormous growth
in Congress' power under the Commerce Clause. See generally F. Frankfurter &
J. Landis, The Business of the Supreme Court 56-59 (1927); H. Hyman, A More
Perfect Union: The Impact of the Civil War and Reconstruction on the
Constitution (1973); Corwin, The Passing of Dual Federalism, 36 Va.L.Rev. 1
(1950); Wiecek, The Reconstruction of Federal Judicial Power, 1863-1875, 13
Am.J.Legal Hist. 333 (1969); Scheiber, State Law and "Industrial Policy" in
American Development, 1790-1987, 75 Calif.L.Rev. 415 (1987); Ackerman,
Constitutional Politics/Constitutional Law, 99 Yale L.J. 453 (1989). While I
believe we should not be blind to history, neither should we read it so
selectively as to restrict the proper scope of Congress' powers under Article
I, especially when the history not mentioned by the majority fully supports a
more expansive understanding of the legislature's authority than may have
existed in the late 18th-century.

Given the scanty textual support for the majority's position, it would be far
more sensible to defer to a coordinate branch of government in its decision to
devise a solution to a national problem of this kind. Certainly in other
contexts, principles of federalism have not insulated States from mandates by
the National Government. The Court has upheld congressional statutes that
impose clear directives on state officials, including those enacted pursuant
to the Extradition Clause, see, _e.g., Puerto Rico v. Branstad,_ 483 U.S. 219,
227-228, 107 S.Ct. 2802, 2808, 97 L.Ed.2d 187 (1987), the post-Civil War
Amendments, see, _e.g., South Carolina v. Katzenbach,_ 383 U.S. 301, 319-320,
334-335, 86 S.Ct. 803, 814, 15 L.Ed.2d 769 (1966), as well as congressional
statutes that require state courts to hear certain actions, see, _e.g., Testa
v. Katt,_ 330 U.S. 386, 392-394, 67 S.Ct. 810, 813-814, 91 L.Ed. 967 (1947).

Justice STEVENS, concurring in part and dissenting in part.

Under the Articles of Confederation, the Federal Government had the power to
issue commands to the States. See Arts. VIII, IX. Because that indirect
exercise of federal power proved ineffective, the Framers of the Constitution
empowered the Federal Government to exercise legislative authority directly
over individuals within the States, even though that direct authority
constituted a greater intrusion on State sovereignty. Nothing in that history
suggests that the Federal Government may not also impose its will upon the
several States as it did under the Articles. The Constitution enhanced, rather
than diminished, the power of the Federal Government.

1

The Tenth Amendment provides: "The powers not delegated to the United States
by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the
States respectively, or to the people."

2

In _United States v. Darby,_ 312 U.S. 100, 61 S.Ct. 451, 85 L.Ed. 609 (1941),
we explained:

"The amendment states but a truism that all is retained which has not been
surrendered. There is nothing in the history of its adoption to suggest that
it was more than declaratory of the relationship between the national and
state governments as it had been established by the Constitution before the
amendment or that its purpose was other than to allay fears that the new
national government might seek to exercise powers not granted, and that the
states might not be able to exercise fully their reserved powers. See e.g., II
Elliot's Debates, 123, 131, III _id._ 450, 464, 600; IV _id._ 140, 149; I
Annals of Congress, 432, 761, 767-768; Story, Commentaries on the
Constitution, ยงยง 1907-1908.

"From the beginning and for many years the amendment has been construed as not
depriving the national government of authority to resort to all means for the
exercise of a granted power which are appropriate and plainly adapted to the
permitted end." _Id.,_ at 124, 61 S.Ct., at 462; see also _ante,_ at 155-157.

3

Even if ยง 2021e(d)(2)(C) is "invalidated" insofar as it applies to the State
of New York, it remains enforceable against the 44 States that have joined
interstate compacts approved by Congress because the compacting States have,
in their agreements, embraced that provision and given it independent effect.
Congress' consent to the compacts was "granted subject to the provisions of
the [Act] . . . and only for so long as the [entities] established in the
compact comply with all the provisions of [the] Act." Appalachian States Low-
Level Radioactive Waste Compact Consent Act, Pub.L. 100-319, 102 Stat. 471.
Thus the compacts incorporated the provisions of the Act, including the take
title provision. These compacts, the product of voluntary interstate
cooperation, unquestionably survive the "invalidation" of ยง 2021e(d)(2)(C) as
it applies to New York. Congress did not "direc[t]" the States to enter into
these compacts and the decision of each compacting State to enter into a
compact was not influenced by the existence of the take title provision:
Whether a State went its own way or joined a compact, it was still subject to
the take title provision.

