# New York v. U.S.

505 U.S. 144 (1992)

**Justice O'CONNOR delivered the opinion of the Court.**

This case implicates one of our Nation's newest problems of public policy and
perhaps our oldest question of constitutional law. The public policy issue
involves the disposal of radioactive waste: In this case, we address the
constitutionality of three provisions of the Low-Level Radioactive Waste
Policy Amendments Act of 1985. The constitutional question is as old as the Constitution: It consists of discerning the proper division of authority between the Federal
Government and the States. We conclude that while Congress has substantial
power under the Constitution to encourage the States to provide for the
disposal of the radioactive waste generated within their borders, the
Constitution does not confer upon Congress the ability simply to compel the
States to do so. We therefore find that only two of the Act's three provisions
at issue are consistent with the Constitution's allocation of power to the
Federal Government.


Faced with the possibility that the Nation would be left with no disposal
sites for low level radioactive waste, Congress responded by enacting the Low-
Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act. Relying
largely on a report submitted by the National Governors' Association, Congress declared a federal policy of holding each State
"responsible for providing for the availability of capacity either within or
outside the State for the disposal of low-level radioactive waste generated
within its borders," and found that such waste could be disposed of "most
safely and efficiently . . . on a regional basis."
The 1980 Act authorized States to enter into regional compacts that, once
ratified by Congress, would have the authority beginning in 1986 to restrict
the use of their disposal facilities to waste generated within member States.
The 1980 Act included no penalties for States
that failed to participate in this plan.

By 1985, only three approved regional compacts had operational disposal
facilities. The following year,
the 1980 Act would have given these three compacts the ability to exclude
waste from nonmembers, and the remaining 31 States would have had no assured
outlet for their low level radioactive waste. With this prospect looming,
Congress once again took up the issue of waste disposal. The result was the
legislation challenged here, the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments
Act of 1985.

The 1985 Act was again based largely on a proposal submitted by the National
Governors' Association. In broad outline, the Act embodies a compromise among
the sited and unsited States. The sited States agreed to extend for seven
years the period in which they would accept low level radioactive waste from
other States. In exchange, the unsited States agreed to end their reliance on
the sited States by 1992.

The mechanics of this compromise are intricate. The Act directs: "Each State
shall be responsible for providing, either by itself or in cooperation with
other States, for the disposal of . . . low-level radioactive waste generated
within the State." The Act authorizes States to "enter into such [interstate] compacts as may be necessary to provide for the establishment and operation of regional disposal
facilities for low-level radioactive waste."  For an additional
seven years beyond the period contemplated by the 1980 Act, from the beginning
of 1986 through the end of 1992, the three existing disposal sites "shall make
disposal capacity available for low-level radioactive waste generated by any
source." But the
three States in which the disposal sites are located are permitted to exact a
graduated surcharge for waste arriving from outside the regional compact. After the seven-year transition
period expires, approved regional compacts may exclude radioactive waste
generated outside the region. 

The Act provides three types of incentives to encourage the States to comply
with their statutory obligation to provide for the disposal of waste generated
within their borders.

10

1\. Monetary incentives. One quarter of the surcharges collected by the
sited States must be transferred to an escrow account held by the Secretary of
Energy. The Secretary then makes payments from this account
to each State that has complied with a series of deadlines. By July 1, 1986,
each State was to have ratified legislation either joining a regional compact
or indicating an intent to develop a disposal facility within the State.  [description of similar steps and deadlines] 

2\. Access incentives. The second type of incentive involves the denial of
access to disposal sites. States that fail to meet the July 1986 deadline may
be charged twice the ordinary surcharge for the remainder of 1986 and may be
denied access to disposal facilities thereafter. [etc.


3\. The take title provision. The third type of incentive is the most
severe. The Act provides:

> If a State (or, where applicable, a compact region) in which low-level radioactive waste is generated is unable to provide for the disposal of all such waste generated within such State or compact region by January 1, 1996, each State in which such waste is generated, upon the request of the generator or owner of the waste, shall take title to the waste, be obligated to take possession of the waste, and shall be liable for all damages directly or indirectly incurred by such generator or owner as a consequence of the failure of the State to take possession of the waste as soon after January 1, 1996, as the generator or owner notifies the State that the waste is available for shipment." 

These three incentives are the focus of petitioners' constitutional challenge.


Petitioners--the State of New York and the two counties--filed this suit
against the United States in 1990. They sought a declaratory judgment that the
Act is inconsistent with the Tenth and Eleventh Amendments to the
Constitution, with the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment, and with the
Guarantee Clause of Article IV of the Constitution. Petitioners have abandoned their Due
Process and Eleventh Amendment claims on their way up the appellate ladder; as
the case stands before us, petitioners claim only that the Act is inconsistent
with the Tenth Amendment and the Guarantee Clause.


In 1788, in the course of explaining to the citizens of New York why the
recently drafted Constitution provided for federal courts, Alexander Hamilton
observed: "The erection of a new government, whatever care or wisdom may
distinguish the work, cannot fail to originate questions of intricacy and
nicety; and these may, in a particular manner, be expected to flow from the
the establishment of a constitution founded upon the total or partial
incorporation of a number of distinct sovereignties." The Federalist No. 82. Hamilton's prediction has proved quite
accurate. While no one disputes the proposition that "[t]he Constitution
created a Federal Government of limited powers"; and while the
Tenth Amendment makes explicit that "[t]he powers not delegated to the United
States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved
to the States respectively, or to the people"; the task of ascertaining the
constitutional line between federal and state power has given rise to many of
the Court's most difficult and celebrated cases. 

These questions can be viewed in either of two ways. In some cases the Court
has inquired whether an Act of Congress is authorized by one of the powers
delegated to Congress in Article I of the Constitution.  In other cases the Court has
sought to determine whether an Act of Congress invades the province of state
sovereignty reserved by the Tenth Amendment. In a
case like this one, involving the division of authority between federal and
state governments, the two inquiries are mirror images of each other. If a
power is delegated to Congress in the Constitution, the Tenth Amendment
expressly disclaims any reservation of that power to the States; if a power is
an attribute of state sovereignty reserved by the Tenth Amendment, it is
necessarily a power the Constitution has not conferred on Congress. 

It is in this sense that the Tenth Amendment "states but a truism that all is
retained which has not been surrendered." As Justice Story put it,
"[t]his amendment is a mere affirmation of what, upon any just reasoning, is a
necessary rule of interpreting the constitution. Being an instrument of
limited and enumerated powers, it follows irresistibly, that what is not
conferred, is withheld, and belongs to the state authorities."  This has
been the Court's consistent understanding: "The States unquestionably do
retai[n] a significant measure of sovereign authority . . . to the extent that
the Constitution has not divested them of their original powers and
transferred those powers to the Federal Government." 

Congress exercises its conferred powers subject to the limitations contained
in the Constitution. Thus, for example, under the Commerce Clause Congress may
regulate publishers engaged in interstate commerce, but Congress is
constrained in the exercise of that power by the First Amendment. The Tenth
Amendment likewise restrains the power of Congress, but this limit is not
derived from the text of the Tenth Amendment itself, which, as we have
discussed, is essentially a tautology. Instead, the Tenth Amendment confirms
that the power of the Federal Government is subject to limits that may, in a
given instance, reserve power to the States. The Tenth Amendment thus directs
us to determine, as in this case, whether an incident of state sovereignty is
protected by a limitation on an Article I power.



Petitioners do not contend that Congress lacks the power to regulate the
disposal of low level radioactive waste. Space in radioactive waste disposal
sites is frequently sold by residents of one State to residents of another.
Regulation of the resulting interstate market in waste disposal is therefore
well within Congress' authority under the Commerce Clause. Petitioners likewise do not dispute that under the Supremacy Clause Congress could, if it wished, pre-empt state radioactive waste regulation. Petitioners contend only that the Tenth Amendment limits the power of Congress to regulate in the way it has chosen. Rather than addressing the problem of waste disposal by directly regulating the generators and disposers of waste, petitioners argue, Congress has impermissibly directed the States to regulate in this
field.


Most of our recent cases interpreting the Tenth Amendment have concerned the
authority of Congress to subject state governments to generally applicable
laws. This case instead concerns the circumstances under which Congress may use the
States as implements of regulation; that is, whether Congress may direct or
otherwise motivate the States to regulate in a particular field or a
particular way. Our cases have established a few principles that guide our
resolution of the issue.

As an initial matter, Congress may not simply "commandee[r] the legislative processes of the States by directly compelling them to enact and enforce a federal regulatory program." While Congress
has substantial powers to govern the Nation directly, including in areas of
intimate concern to the States, the Constitution has never been understood to
confer upon Congress the ability to require the States to govern according to
Congress' instructions. The Court has been explicit about this
distinction. "Both the States and the United States existed before the
Constitution. The people, through that instrument, established a more perfect
union by substituting a national government, acting, with ample power,
directly upon the citizens, instead of the Confederate government, which
acted with powers, greatly restricted, only upon the States." 

Indeed, the question whether the Constitution should permit Congress to employ
state governments as regulatory agencies was a topic of lively debate among
the Framers. Under the Articles of Confederation, Congress lacked the
authority in most respects to govern the people directly. In practice,
Congress "could not directly tax or legislate upon individuals; it had no
explicit 'legislative' or 'governmental' power to make binding 'law'
enforceable as such." 

The inadequacy of this governmental structure was responsible in part for the
Constitutional Convention. Alexander Hamilton observed: "The great and radical
vice in the construction of the existing Confederation is in the principle of
LEGISLATION for STATES or GOVERNMENTS, in their CORPORATE or COLLECTIVE
CAPACITIES, and as contra-distinguished from the INDIVIDUALS of whom they
consist." The Federalist No. 15. As Hamilton
saw it, "we must resolve to incorporate into our plan those ingredients which
may be considered as forming the characteristic difference between a league
and a government; we must extend the authority of the Union to the persons of
the citizens--the only proper objects of government." 

In the end, the Convention opted for a Constitution in which Congress would
exercise its legislative authority directly over individuals rather than over
States. This choice was made clear to the
subsequent state ratifying conventions. Oliver Ellsworth, a member of the
Connecticut delegation in Philadelphia, explained the distinction to his
State's convention: "This Constitution does not attempt to coerce sovereign
bodies, states, in their political capacity. . . . But this legal coercion
singles out the . . . individual." 

In providing for a stronger central government, therefore, the Framers
explicitly chose a Constitution that confers upon Congress the power to
regulate individuals, not States. As we have seen, the Court has consistently
respected this choice. We have always understood that even where Congress has
the authority under the Constitution to pass laws requiring or prohibiting
certain acts, it lacks the power directly to compel the States to require or
prohibit those acts. 

This is not to say that Congress lacks the ability to encourage a State to
regulate in a particular way, or that Congress may not hold out incentives to
the States as a method of influencing a State's policy choices. Our cases have
identified a variety of methods, short of outright coercion, by which Congress
may urge a State to adopt a legislative program consistent with federal
interests. Two of these methods are of particular relevance here.

42

First, under Congress' spending power, "Congress may attach conditions on the
receipt of federal funds." South Dakota v. Dole,. Such conditions must (among other requirements) bear some
relationship to the purpose of the federal spending; otherwise, of course, the spending power
could render academic the Constitution's other grants and limits of federal
authority. Where the recipient of federal funds is a State, as is not unusual
today, the conditions attached to the funds by Congress may influence a
State's legislative choices. 

Second, where Congress has the authority to regulate private activity under
the Commerce Clause, we have recognized Congress' power to offer States the
choice of regulating that activity according to federal standards or having
state law pre-empted by federal regulation. This arrangement, which has been termed "a program of cooperative federalism," is replicated in
numerous federal statutory schemes. These include the Clean Water Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 [and others].

By either of these two methods, as by any other permissible method of
encouraging a State to conform to federal policy choices, the residents of the
State retain the ultimate decision as to whether or not the State will comply.
If a State's citizens view federal policy as sufficiently contrary to local
interests, they may elect to decline a federal grant. If state residents would
prefer their government to devote its attention and resources to problems
other than those deemed important by Congress, they may choose to have the
Federal Government rather than the State bear the expense of a federally
mandated regulatory program, and they may continue to supplement that program
to the extent state law is not preempted. Where Congress encourages state
regulation rather than compelling it, state governments remain responsive to
the local electorate's preferences; state officials remain accountable to the
people.

By contrast, where the Federal Government compels States to regulate, the
accountability of both state and federal officials is diminished. If the
citizens of New York, for example, do not consider that making provision for
the disposal of radioactive waste is in their best interest, they may elect
state officials who share their view. That view can always be preempted under
the Supremacy Clause if it is contrary to the national view, but in such a
case it is the Federal Government that makes the decision in full view of the
public, and it will be federal officials that suffer the consequences if the
decision turns out to be detrimental or unpopular. But where the Federal
Government directs the States to regulate, it may be state officials who will
bear the brunt of public disapproval, while the federal officials who devised
the regulatory program may remain insulated from the electoral ramifications
of their decision. Accountability is thus diminished when, due to federal
coercion, elected state officials cannot regulate in accordance with the views
of the local electorate in matters not pre-empted by federal regulation. 

With these principles in mind, we turn to the three challenged provisions of
the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendments Act of 1985.


The parties in this case advance two quite different views of the Act. As
petitioners see it, the Act imposes a requirement directly upon the States
that they regulate in the field of radioactive waste disposal in order to meet
Congress' mandate that "[e]ach State shall be responsible for providing . . .
for the disposal of . . . low-level radioactive waste."  Petitioners understand this provision as a direct command from
Congress, enforceable independent of the three sets of incentives provided by
the Act. Respondents, on the other hand, read this provision together with the
incentives, and see the Act as affording the States three sets of choices.
According to respondents, the Act permits a State to choose first between
regulating pursuant to federal standards and losing the right to a share of
the Secretary of Energy's escrow account; to choose second between regulating
pursuant to federal standards and progressively losing access to disposal
sites in other States; and to choose third between regulating pursuant to
federal standards and taking title to the waste generated within the State.
Respondents thus interpret ยง 2021c(a)(1)(A), despite the statute's use of the
word "shall," to provide no more than an option which a State may elect or
eschew.

The Act could plausibly be understood either as a mandate to regulate or as a
series of incentives. Under petitioners' view, however, ยง 2021c(a)(1)(A) of
the Act would clearly "commandee[r] the legislative processes of the States by
directly compelling them to enact and enforce a federal regulatory program." We must reject this interpretation of the provision
for two reasons. First, such an outcome would, to say the least, "upset the
usual constitutional balance of federal and state powers." "[I]t is incumbent upon the
federal courts to be certain of Congress' intent before finding that federal
law overrides this balance," but
the Act's amenability to an equally plausible alternative construction
prevents us from possessing such certainty. Second, "where an otherwise
acceptable construction of a statute would raise serious constitutional
problems, the Court will construe the statute to avoid such problems unless
such construction is plainly contrary to the intent of Congress." This rule of
statutory construction pushes us away from petitioners' understanding of ยง
2021c(a)(1)(A) of the Act, under which it compels the States to regulate
according to Congress' instructions.

We therefore decline petitioners' invitation to construe ยง 2021c(a)(1)(A),
alone and in isolation, as a command to the States independent of the
remainder of the Act. Construed as a whole, the Act comprises three sets of
"incentives" for the States to provide for the disposal of low level
radioactive waste generated within their borders. We consider each in turn.

The first set of incentives works in three steps. First, Congress has authorized States with disposal sites to impose a surcharge on radioactive waste received from other States. Second, the Secretary of Energy collects a portion of this surcharge and places the money in an escrow account. Third, States achieving a series of milestones receive portions of this fund.

The first of these steps is an unexceptionable exercise of Congress' power to
authorize the States to burden interstate commerce. While the Commerce Clause
has long been understood to limit the States' ability to discriminate against
interstate commerce, that limit may be lifted, as it has been here, by an expression of the "unambiguous intent" of Congress. Whether or not the States would be permitted to burden the interstate
transport of low level radioactive waste in the absence of Congress' approval,
the States can clearly do so with Congress' approval, which is what the Act
gives them.

The second step, the Secretary's collection of a percentage of the surcharge,
is no more than a federal tax on interstate commerce, which petitioners do not
claim to be an invalid exercise of either Congress' commerce or taxing power.

The third step is a conditional exercise of Congress' authority under the
Spending Clause: Congress has placed conditions--the achievement of the
milestones--on the receipt of federal funds. Petitioners do not contend that
Congress has exceeded its authority in any of the four respects our cases have
identified.  The expenditure is for the general welfare; the
States are required to use the money they receive for the purpose of assuring
the safe disposal of radioactive waste. The
conditions imposed are unambiguous; the Act informs the States
exactly what they must do and by when they must do it in order to obtain a
share of the escrow account. The conditions imposed are reasonably related to
the purpose of the expenditure; both the conditions and the payments embody Congress'
efforts to address the pressing problem of radioactive waste disposal.
Finally, petitioners do not claim that the conditions imposed by the Act
violate any independent constitutional prohibition. 


The Act's first set of incentives, in which Congress has conditioned grants to
the States upon the States' attainment of a series of milestones, is thus well
within the authority of Congress under the Commerce and Spending Clauses.
Because the first set of incentives is supported by affirmative constitutional
grants of power to Congress, it is not inconsistent with the Tenth Amendment.

In the second set of incentives, Congress has authorized States and regional
compacts with disposal sites gradually to increase the cost of access to the
sites, and then to deny access altogether, to radioactive waste generated in
States that do not meet federal deadlines. As a simple regulation, this
provision would be within the power of Congress to authorize the States to
discriminate against interstate commerce.  Where federal regulation of private
activity is within the scope of the Commerce Clause, we have recognized the
ability of Congress to offer states the choice of regulating that activity
according to federal standards or having state law pre-empted by federal
regulation. 

This is the choice presented to nonsited States by the Act's second set of
incentives: States may either regulate the disposal of radioactive waste
according to federal standards by attaining local or regional self-
sufficiency, or their residents who produce radioactive waste will be subject
to federal regulation authorizing sited States and regions to deny access to
their disposal sites. The affected States are not compelled by Congress to
regulate, because any burden caused by a State's refusal to regulate will fall
on those who generate waste and find no outlet for its disposal, rather than
on the State as a sovereign. A State whose citizens do not wish it to attain
the Act's milestones may devote its attention and its resources to issues its
citizens deem more worthy; the choice remains at all times with the residents
of the State, not with Congress. The State need not expend any funds, or
participate in any federal program, if local residents do not view such
expenditures or participation as worthwhile.  Nor must the State abandon the field if it does not
accede to federal direction; the State may continue to regulate the generation
and disposal of radioactive waste in any manner its citizens see fit.


The Act's second set of incentives thus represents a conditional exercise of
Congress' commerce power, along the lines of those we have held to be within
Congress' authority. As a result, the second set of incentives does not
intrude on the sovereignty reserved to the States by the Tenth Amendment.


The take title provision is of a different character. This third so-called
"incentive" offers States, as an alternative to regulating pursuant to
Congress' direction, the option of taking title to and possession of the low
level radioactive waste generated within their borders and becoming liable for
all damages waste generators suffer as a result of the States' failure to do
so promptly. In this provision, Congress has crossed the line distinguishing
encouragement from coercion.

The take title provision offers state governments a "choice" of either
accepting ownership of waste or regulating according to the instructions of
Congress. Respondents do not claim that the Constitution would authorize
Congress to impose either option as a freestanding requirement. On one hand,
the Constitution would not permit Congress simply to transfer radioactive
waste from generators to state governments. Such a forced transfer, standing
alone, would in principle be no different than a congressionally compelled
subsidy from state governments to radioactive waste producers. The same is
true of the provision requiring the States to become liable for the
generators' damages. Standing alone, this provision would be indistinguishable
from an Act of Congress directing the States to assume the liabilities of
certain state residents. Either type of federal action would "commandeer"
state governments into the service of federal regulatory purposes, and would
for this reason be inconsistent with the Constitution's division of authority
between federal and state governments. On the other hand, the second
alternative held out to state governments--regulating pursuant to Congress'
direction--would, standing alone, present a simple command to state
governments to implement legislation enacted by Congress. As we have seen, the
Constitution does not empower Congress to subject state governments to this
type of instruction.

Because an instruction to state governments to take title to waste, standing
alone, would be beyond the authority of Congress, and because a direct order
to regulate, standing alone, would also be beyond the authority of Congress,
it follows that Congress lacks the power to offer the States a choice between
the two. Unlike the first two sets of incentives, the take title incentive
does not represent the conditional exercise of any congressional power
enumerated in the Constitution. In this provision, Congress has not held out
the threat of exercising its spending power or its commerce power; it has
instead held out the threat, should the States not regulate according to one
federal instruction, of simply forcing the States to submit to another federal
instruction. A choice between two unconstitutionally coercive regulatory
techniques is no choice at all. Either way, "the Act commandeers the
legislative processes of the States by directly compelling them to enact and
enforce a federal regulatory program." 

Respondents emphasize the latitude given to the States to implement Congress'
plan. The Act enables the States to regulate pursuant to Congress'
instructions in any number of different ways. States may avoid taking title by
contracting with sited regional compacts, by building a disposal site alone or
as part of a compact, or by permitting private parties to build a disposal
site. States that host sites may employ a wide range of designs and disposal
methods, subject only to broad federal regulatory limits. This line of
reasoning, however, only underscores the critical alternative a State lacks: A
State may not decline to administer the federal program. No matter which path
the State chooses, it must follow the direction of Congress.

The take title provision appears to be unique. No other federal statute has
been cited which offers a state government no option other than that of
implementing legislation enacted by Congress. Whether one views the take title
provision as lying outside Congress' enumerated powers, or as infringing upon
the core of state sovereignty reserved by the Tenth Amendment, the provision
is inconsistent with the federal structure of our Government established by
the Constitution.

\newpage

