483 U.S. 203

107 S.Ct. 2793

97 L.Ed.2d 171

SOUTH DAKOTA, Petitioner,  
v.  
Elizabeth H. DOLE, Secretary, United States Department of Transportation.

No. 86-260.

Argued April 28, 1987.

Decided June 23, 1987.

_Syllabus_

Title 23 U.S.C. § 158 (1982 ed., Supp. III) directs the Secretary of
Transportation to withhold a percentage of otherwise allocable federal highway
funds from States "in which the purchase or public possession . . . of any
alcoholic beverage by a person who is less than twenty-one years of age is
lawful." South Dakota, which permits persons 19 years old or older to purchase
beer containing up to 3.2% alcohol, sued in Federal District Court for a
declaratory judgment that § 158 violates the constitutional limitations on
congressional exercise of the spending power under Art. I, § 8, cl. 1, of the
Constitution and violates the Twenty-first Amendment. The District Court
rejected the State's claims, and the Court of Appeals affirmed.

_Held:_ Even if Congress, in view of the Twenty-first Amendment, might lack
the power to impose directly a national minimum drinking age (a question not
decided here), § 158's indirect encouragement of state action to obtain
uniformity in the States' drinking ages is a valid use of the spending power.
Pp. 206-212.

(a) Incident to the spending power, Congress may attach conditions on the
receipt of federal funds. However, exercise of the power is subject to certain
restrictions, including that it must be in pursuit of "the general welfare."
Section 158 is consistent with such restriction, since the means chosen by
Congress to address a dangerous situation--the interstate problem resulting
from the incentive, created by differing state drinking ages, for young
persons to combine drinking and driving--were reasonably calculated to advance
the general welfare. Section 158 also is consistent with the spending power
restrictions that, if Congress desires to condition the States' receipt of
federal funds, it must do so unambiguously, enabling the States to exercise
their choice knowingly, cognizant of the consequences of their participation;
and that conditions on federal grants must be related to a national concern
(safe interstate travel here). Pp. 206-209.

(b) Nor is § 158 invalidated by the spending power limitation that the
conditional grant of federal funds must not be independently barred by other
constitutional provisions (the Twenty-first Amendment here). Such limitation
is not a prohibition on the indirect achievement of objectives which Congress
is not empowered to achieve directly, but, instead, means that the power may
not be used to induce the States to engage in activities that would themselves
be unconstitutional. Here, if South Dakota were to succumb to Congress'
blandishments and raise its drinking age to 21, its action would not violate
anyone's constitutional rights. Moreover, the relatively small financial
inducement offered by Congress here--resulting from the State's loss of only
5% of federal funds otherwise obtainable under certain highway grant programs
--is not so coercive as to pass the point at which pressure turns into
compulsion. Pp. 209-212.

791 F.2d 628 (CA 8 1986), affirmed.

REHNQUIST, C.J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which WHITE, MARSHALL,
BLACKMUN, POWELL, STEVENS, and SCALIA, JJ., joined. BRENNAN, J., _post,_ p.
----, and O'CONNOR, J., _post,_ p. ----, filed dissenting opinions.

Roger A. Tellinghuisen, Pierre, S.D., for petitioner.

Louis R. Cohen, Washington, D.C., for respondent.

Chief Justice REHNQUIST delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

Petitioner South Dakota permits persons 19 years of age or older to purchase
beer containing up to 3.2% alcohol. S.D.Codified Laws § 35-6-27 (1986). In
1984 Congress enacted 23 U.S.C. § 158 (1982 ed., Supp. III), which directs the
Secretary of Transportation to withhold a percentage of federal highway funds
otherwise allocable from States "in which the purchase or public possession .
. . of any alcoholic beverage by a person who is less than twenty-one years of
age is lawful." The State sued in United States District Court seeking a
declaratory judgment that § 158 violates the constitutional limitations on
congressional exercise of the spending power and violates the Twenty-first
Amendment to the United States Constitution. The District Court rejected the
State's claims, and the Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit affirmed. 791
F.2d 628 (1986).

2

In this Court, the parties direct most of their efforts to defining the proper
scope of the Twenty-first Amendment. Relying on our statement in _California
Retail Liquor Dealers Assn. v. Midcal Aluminum, Inc.,_ 445 U.S. 97, 110, 100
S.Ct. 937, 946, 63 L.Ed.2d 233 (1980), that the "Twenty-first Amendment grants
the States virtually complete control over whether to permit importation or
sale of liquor and how to structure the liquor distribution system," South
Dakota asserts that the setting of minimum drinking ages is clearly within the
"core powers" reserved to the States under § 2 of the Amendment.1 Brief for
Petitioner 43-44. Section 158, petitioner claims, usurps that core power. The
Secretary in response asserts that the Twenty-first Amendment is simply not
implicated by § 158; the plain language of § 2 confirms the States' broad
power to impose restrictions on the sale and distribution of alcoholic
beverages but does not confer on them any power to _permit_ sales that
Congress seeks to _prohibit._ Brief for Respondent 25-26. That Amendment,
under this reasoning, would not prevent Congress from affirmatively enacting a
national minimum drinking age more restrictive than that provided by the
various state laws; and it would follow _a fortiori_ that the indirect
inducement involved here is compatible with the Twenty-first Amendment.

3

These arguments present questions of the meaning of the Twenty-first
Amendment, the bounds of which have escaped precise definition. _Bacchus
Imports, Ltd. v. Dias,_ 468 U.S. 263, 274-276, 104 S.Ct. 3049, 3056-3058, 82
L.Ed.2d 200 (1984); _Craig v. Boren,_ 429 U.S. 190, 206, 97 S.Ct. 451, 461, 50
L.Ed.2d 397 (1976). Despite the extended treatment of the question by the
parties, however, we need not decide in this case whether that Amendment would
prohibit an attempt by Congress to legislate directly a national minimum
drinking age. Here, Congress has acted indirectly under its spending power to
encourage uniformity in the States' drinking ages. As we explain below, we
find this legislative effort within constitutional bounds even if Congress may
not regulate drinking ages directly.

4

The Constitution empowers Congress to "lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts,
and Excises, to pay the Debts and provide for the common Defence and general
Welfare of the United States." Art. I, § 8, cl. 1. Incident to this power,
Congress may attach conditions on the receipt of federal funds, and has
repeatedly employed the power "to further broad policy objectives by
conditioning receipt of federal moneys upon compliance by the recipient with
federal statutory and administrative directives." _Fullilove v. Klutznick,_
448 U.S. 448, 474, 100 S.Ct. 2758, 2772, 65 L.Ed.2d 902 (1980) (opinion of
Burger, C.J.). See _Lau v. Nichols,_ 414 U.S. 563, 569, 94 S.Ct. 786, 789, 39
L.Ed.2d 1 (1974); _Ivanhoe Irrigation Dist. v. McCracken,_ 357 U.S. 275, 295,
78 S.Ct. 1174, 1185, 2 L.Ed.2d 1313 (1958); _Oklahoma_ v. Civil Service
Comm'n, 330 U.S. 127, 143-144, 67 S.Ct. 544, 553-554, 91 L.Ed. 794 (1947);
_Steward Machine Co. v. Davis,_ 301 U.S. 548, 57 S.Ct. 883, 81 L.Ed. 1279
(1937). The breadth of this power was made clear in _United States v. Butler,_
297 U.S. 1, 66, 56 S.Ct. 312, 319, 80 L.Ed. 477 (1936), where the Court,
resolving a longstanding debate over the scope of the Spending Clause,
determined that "the power of Congress to authorize expenditure of public
moneys for public purposes is not limited by the direct grants of legislative
power found in the Constitution." Thus, objectives not thought to be within
Article I's "enumerated legislative fields," _id.,_ at 65, 56 S.Ct., at 319,
may nevertheless be attained through the use of the spending power and the
conditional grant of federal funds.

5

The spending power is of course not unlimited, _Pennhurst State School and
Hospital v. Halderman,_ 451 U.S. 1, 17, and n. 13, 101 S.Ct. 1531, 1540 n. 13,
67 L.Ed.2d 694 (1981), but is instead subject to several general restrictions
articulated in our cases. The first of these limitations is derived from the
language of the Constitution itself: the exercise of the spending power must
be in pursuit of "the general welfare." See _Helvering v. Davis,_ 301 U.S.
619, 640-641, 57 S.Ct. 904, 908-909, 81 L.Ed. 1307 (1937); _United States v.
Butler, supra,_ at 65, 56 S.Ct., at 319. In considering whether a particular
expenditure is intended to serve general public purposes, courts should defer
substantially to the judgment of Congress. _Helvering v. Davis, supra,_ at
640, 645, 57 S.Ct., at 908-909.2 Second, we have required that if Congress
desires to condition the States' receipt of federal funds, it "must do so
unambiguously . . ., enabl[ing] the States to exercise their choice knowingly,
cognizant of the consequences of their participation." _Pennhurst State School
and Hospital v. Halderman, supra,_ at 17, 101 S.Ct., at 1540. Third, our cases
have suggested (without significant elaboration) that conditions on federal
grants might be illegitimate if they are unrelated "to the federal interest in
particular national projects or programs." _Massachusetts v. United States,_
435 U.S. 444, 461, 98 S.Ct. 1153, 1164, 55 L.Ed.2d 403 (1978) (plurality
opinion). See also _Ivanhoe Irrigation Dist. v. McCracken, supra,_ 357 U.S.,
at 295, 78 S.Ct., at 1185, ("[T]he Federal Government may establish and impose
reasonable conditions relevant to federal interest in the project and to the
over-all objectives thereof"). Finally, we have noted that other
constitutional provisions may provide an independent bar to the conditional
grant of federal funds. _Lawrence County v. Lead-Deadwood School Dist.,_ 469
U.S. 256, 269-270, 105 S.Ct. 695, 703-704, 83 L.Ed.2d 635 (1985); _Buckley v.
Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 91, 96 S.Ct. 612, 669, 46 L.Ed.2d 659 (1976) _(per
curiam); King v. Smith,_ 392 U.S. 309, 333, n. 34, 88 S.Ct. 2128, 2141, n. 34,
20 L.Ed.2d 1118 (1968).

6

South Dakota does not seriously claim that § 158 is inconsistent with any of
the first three restrictions mentioned above. We can readily conclude that the
provision is designed to serve the general welfare, especially in light of the
fact that "the concept of welfare or the opposite is shaped by Congress. . .
." _Helvering v. Davis, supra,_ at 645, 57 S.Ct., at 910. Congress found that
the differing drinking ages in the States created particular incentives for
young persons to combine their desire to drink with their ability to drive,
and that this interstate problem required a national solution. The means it
chose to address this dangerous situation were reasonably calculated to
advance the general welfare. The conditions upon which States receive the
funds, moreover, could not be more clearly stated by Congress. See 23 U.S.C. §
158 (1982 ed., Supp. III). And the State itself, rather than challenging the
germaneness of the condition to federal purposes, admits that it "has never
contended that the congressional action was . . . unrelated to a national
concern in the absence of the Twenty-first Amendment." Brief for Petitioner
52. Indeed, the condition imposed by Congress is directly related to one of
the main purposes for which highway funds are expended--safe interstate
travel. See 23 U.S.C. § 101(b).3 This goal of the interstate highway system
had been frustrated by varying drinking ages among the States. A Presidential
commission appointed to study alcohol-related accidents and fatalities on the
Nation's highways concluded that the lack of uniformity in the States'
drinking ages created "an incentive to drink and drive" because "young persons
commut[e] to border States where the drinking age is lower." Presidential
Commission on Drunk Driving, Final Report 11 (1983). By enacting § 158,
Congress conditioned the receipt of federal funds in a way reasonably
calculated to address this particular impediment to a purpose for which the
funds are expended.

7

The remaining question about the validity of § 158--and the basic point of
disagreement between the parties--is whether the Twenty-first Amendment
constitutes an "independent constitutional bar" to the conditional grant of
federal funds. _Lawrence County v. Lead-Deadwood School Dist., supra,_ at
269-270, 105 S.Ct., at 702-703. Petitioner, relying on its view that the
Twenty-first Amendment prohibits _direct_ regulation of drinking ages by
Congress, asserts that "Congress may not use the spending power to regulate
that which it is prohibited from regulating directly under the Twenty-first
Amendment." Brief for Petitioner 52-53. But our cases show that this
"independent constitutional bar" limitation on the spending power is not of
the kind petitioner suggests. _United States v. Butler, supra,_ 297 U.S., at
66, 56 S.Ct., at 319, for example, established that the constitutional
limitations on Congress when exercising its spending power are less exacting
than those on its authority to regulate directly.

8

We have also held that a perceived Tenth Amendment limitation on congressional
regulation of state affairs did not concomitantly limit the range of
conditions legitimately placed on federal grants. In _Oklahoma v. Civil
Service Comm'n,_ 330 U.S. 127, 67 S.Ct. 544, 91 L.Ed. 794 (1947), the Court
considered the validity of the Hatch Act insofar as it was applied to
political activities of state officials whose employment was financed in whole
or in part with federal funds. The State contended that an order under this
provision to withhold certain federal funds unless a state official was
removed invaded its sovereignty in violation of the Tenth Amendment. Though
finding that "the United States is not concerned with, and has no power to
regulate, local political activities as such of state officials," the Court
nevertheless held that the Federal Government "does have power to fix the
terms upon which its money allotments to states shall be disbursed." _Id.,_ at
143, 67 S.Ct., at 553. The Court found no violation of the State's sovereignty
because the State could, and did, adopt "the 'simple expedient' of not
yielding to what she urges is federal coercion. The offer of benefits to a
state by the United States dependent upon cooperation by the state with
federal plans, assumedly for the general welfare, is not unusual." _Id.,_ at
143-144, 67 S.Ct., at 553-554 (citation omitted). See also _Steward Machine
Co. v. Davis,_ 301 U.S., at 595, 57 S.Ct., at 894 ("There is only a condition
which the state is free at pleasure to disregard or to fulfill");
_Massachusetts v. Mellon,_ 262 U.S. 447, 482, 43 S.Ct. 597, 599, 67 L.Ed. 1078
(1923).

9

These cases establish that the "independent constitutional bar" limitation on
the spending power is not, as petitioner suggests, a prohibition on the
indirect achievement of objectives which Congress is not empowered to achieve
directly. Instead, we think that the language in our earlier opinions stands
for the unexceptionable proposition that the power may not be used to induce
the States to engage in activities that would themselves be unconstitutional.
Thus, for example, a grant of federal funds conditioned on invidiously
discriminatory state action or the infliction of cruel and unusual punishment
would be an illegitimate exercise of the Congress' broad spending power. But
no such claim can be or is made here. Were South Dakota to succumb to the
blandishments offered by Congress and raise its drinking age to 21, the
State's action in so doing would not violate the constitutional rights of
anyone.

10

Our decisions have recognized that in some circumstances the financial
inducement offered by Congress might be so coercive as to pass the point at
which "pressure turns into compulsion." _Steward Machine Co. v. Davis, supra,_
301 U.S., at 590, 57 S.Ct., at 892. Here, however, Congress has directed only
that a State desiring to establish a minimum drinking age lower than 21 lose a
relatively small percentage of certain federal highway funds. Petitioner
contends that the coercive nature of this program is evident from the degree
of success it has achieved. We cannot conclude, however, that a conditional
grant of federal money of this sort is unconstitutional simply by reason of
its success in achieving the congressional objective.

11

When we consider, for a moment, that all South Dakota would lose if she
adheres to her chosen course as to a suitable minimum drinking age is 5% of
the funds otherwise obtainable under specified highway grant programs, the
argument as to coercion is shown to be more rhetoric than fact. As we said a
half century ago in _Steward Machine Co. v. Davis:_

12

"[E]very rebate from a tax when conditioned upon conduct is in some measure a
temptation. But to hold that motive or temptation is equivalent to coercion is
to plunge the law in endless difficulties. The outcome of such a doctrine is
the acceptance of a philosophical determinism by which choice becomes
impossible. Till now the law has been guided by a robust common sense which
assumes the freedom of the will as a working hypothesis in the solution of its
problems." 301 U.S., at 589-590, 57 S.Ct., at 891-892.

13

Here Congress has offered relatively mild encouragement to the States to enact
higher minimum drinking ages than they would otherwise choose. But the
enactment of such laws remains the prerogative of the States not merely in
theory but in fact. Even if Congress might lack the power to impose a national
minimum drinking age directly, we conclude that encouragement to state action
found in § 158 is a valid use of the spending power. Accordingly, the judgment
of the Court of Appeals is

14

_Affirmed._

15

Justice BRENNAN, dissenting.

16

I agree with Justice O'CONNOR that regulation of the minimum age of purchasers
of liquor falls squarely within the ambit of those powers reserved to the
States by the Twenty-first Amendment. See _post,_ at 218. Since States possess
this constitutional power, Congress cannot condition a federal grant in a
manner that abridges this right. The Amendment, itself, strikes the proper
balance between federal and state authority. I therefore dissent.

17

Justice O'CONNOR, dissenting.

18

The Court today upholds the National Minimum Drinking Age Amendment, 23 U.S.C.
§ 158 (1982 ed., Supp. III), as a valid exercise of the spending power
conferred by Article I, § 8\. But § 158 is not a condition on spending
reasonably related to the expenditure of federal funds and cannot be justified
on that ground. Rather, it is an attempt to regulate the sale of liquor, an
attempt that lies outside Congress' power to regulate commerce because it
falls within the ambit of § 2 of the Twenty-first Amendment.

19

My disagreement with the Court is relatively narrow on the spending power
issue: it is a disagreement about the application of a principle rather than a
disagreement on the principle itself. I agree with the Court that Congress may
attach conditions on the receipt of federal funds to further "the federal
interest in particular national projects or programs." _Massachusetts v.
United States,_ 435 U.S. 444, 461, 98 S.Ct. 1153, 1164, 55 L.Ed.2d 403 (1978);
see _Oklahoma v. Civil Service Comm'n,_ 330 U.S. 127, 143-144, 67 S.Ct. 544,
553-554, 91 L.Ed. 794 (1947); _Steward Machine Co. v. Davis,_ 301 U.S. 548, 57
S.Ct. 883, 81 L.Ed. 1279 (1937). I also subscribe to the established
proposition that the reach of the spending power "is not limited by the direct
grants of legislative power found in the Constitution." _United States v.
Butler,_ 297 U.S. 1, 66, 56 S.Ct. 312, 319, 80 L.Ed. 477 (1936). Finally, I
agree that there are four separate types of limitations on the spending power:
the expenditure must be for the general welfare, _Helvering v. Davis,_ 301
U.S. 619, 640-641, 57 S.Ct. 904, 908-909, 81 L.Ed. 1307 (1937), the conditions
imposed must be unambiguous, _Pennhurst State School and Hospital v.
Halderman,_ 451 U.S. 1, 17, 101 S.Ct. 1531 (1981), they must be reasonably
related to the purpose of the expenditure, _Massachusetts v. United States,
supra,_ 435 U.S., at 461, 98 S.Ct., at 1164, and the legislation may not
violate any independent constitutional prohibition, _Lawrence County v. Lead-
Deadwood School Dist.,_ 469 U.S. 256, 269-270, 105 S.Ct. 695, 703-704, 83
L.Ed.2d 635 (1985). _Ante,_ at 207-208. Insofar as two of those limitations
are concerned, the Court is clearly correct that § 158 is wholly
unobjectionable. Establishment of a national minimum drinking age certainly
fits within the broad concept of the general welfare and the statute is
entirely unambiguous. I am also willing to assume, _arguendo,_ that the
Twenty-first Amendment does not constitute an "independent constitutional bar"
to a spending condition. See _ante,_ at 209-211.

20

But the Court's application of the requirement that the condition imposed be
reasonably related to the purpose for which the funds are expended is cursory
and unconvincing. We have repeatedly said that Congress may condition grants
under the spending power only in ways reasonably related to the purpose of the
federal program. _Massachusetts v. United States, supra,_ 435 U.S., at 461, 98
S.Ct., at 1164; _Ivanhoe Irrigation Dist. v. McCracken,_ 357 U.S. 275, 295, 78
S.Ct. 1174, 1185, 2 L.Ed.2d 313 (1958) (the United States may impose
"reasonable conditions relevant to federal interest in the project and to the
over-all objectives thereof"); _Steward Machine Co. v. Davis, supra,_ 301 U.S.
at 590, 57 S.Ct., at 892 ("We do not say that a tax is valid, when imposed by
act of Congress, if it is laid upon the condition that a state may escape its
operation through the adoption of a statute unrelated in subject matter to
activities fairly within the scope of national policy and power"). In my view,
establishment of a minimum drinking age of 21 is not sufficiently related to
interstate highway construction to justify so conditioning funds appropriated
for that purpose.

21

In support of its contrary conclusion, the Court relies on a supposed
concession by counsel for South Dakota that the State "has never contended
that the congressional action was . . . unrelated to a national concern in the
absence of the Twenty-first Amendment." Brief for Petitioner 52. In the
absence of the Twenty-first Amendment, however, there is a strong argument
that the Congress might regulate the conditions under which liquor is sold
under the commerce power, just as it regulates the sale of many other
commodities that are in or affect interstate commerce. The fact that the
Twenty-first Amendment is crucial to the State's argument does not, therefore,
amount to a concession that the condition imposed by § 158 is reasonably
related to highway construction. The Court also relies on a portion of the
argument transcript in support of its claim that South Dakota conceded the
reasonable relationship point. _Ante,_ at 208--209, n. 3, citing Tr. of Oral
Arg. 19-21. But counsel's statements there are at best ambiguous. Counsel
essentially said no more than that he was not prepared to argue the reasonable
relationship question discussed at length in the Brief for the National
Conference of State Legislatures et al. as _Amici Curiae._

22

Aside from these "concessions" by counsel, the Court asserts the
reasonableness of the relationship between the supposed purpose of the
expenditure--"safe interstate travel"--and the drinking age condition. _Ante,_
at 208. The Court reasons that Congress wishes that the roads it builds may be
used safely, that drunken drivers threaten highway safety, and that young
people are more likely to drive while under the influence of alcohol under
existing law than would be the case if there were a uniform national drinking
age of 21. It hardly needs saying, however, that if the purpose of § 158 is to
deter drunken driving, it is far too over and under-inclusive. It is over-
inclusive because it stops teenagers from drinking even when they are not
about to drive on interstate highways. It is under-inclusive because teenagers
pose only a small part of the drunken driving problem in this Nation. See,
_e.g.,_ 130 Cong.Rec. 18648 (1984) (remarks of Sen. Humphrey) ("Eighty-four
percent of all highway fatalities involving alcohol occur among those whose
ages exceed 21"); _id.,_ at 18651 (remarks of Sen. McClure) ("Certainly,
statistically, if you use that one set of statistics, then the mandatory
drinking age ought to be raised at least to 30"); _ibid._ (remarks of Sen.
Symms) ("[M]ost of the studies point out that the drivers of age 21-24 are the
worst offenders").

23

When Congress appropriates money to build a highway, it is entitled to insist
that the highway be a safe one. But it is not entitled to insist as a
condition of the use of highway funds that the State impose or change
regulations in other areas of the State's social and economic life because of
an attenuated or tangential relationship to highway use or safety. Indeed, if
the rule were otherwise, the Congress could effectively regulate almost any
area of a State's social, political, or economic life on the theory that use
of the interstate transportation system is somehow enhanced. If, for example,
the United States were to condition highway moneys upon moving the state
capital, I suppose it might argue that interstate transportation is
facilitated by locating local governments in places easily accessible to
interstate highways--or, conversely, that highways might become overburdened
if they had to carry traffic to and from the state capital. In my mind, such a
relationship is hardly more attenuated than the one which the Court finds
supports § 158\. Cf. Tr. of Oral Arg. 39 (counsel for the United States
conceding that to condition a grant upon adoption of a unicameral legislature
would violate the "germaneness" requirement).

24

There is a clear place at which the Court can draw the line between
permissible and impermissible conditions on federal grants. It is the line
identified in the Brief for the National Conference of State Legislatures et
al. as _Amici Curiae:_ "Congress has the power to _spend_ for the general
welfare, it has the power to _legislate_ only for delegated purposes. . . .

25

"The appropriate inquiry, then, is whether the spending requirement or
prohibition is a condition on a grant or whether it is regulation. The
difference turns on whether the requirement specifies in some way how the
money should be spent, so that Congress' intent in making the grant will be
effectuated. Congress has no power under the Spending Clause to impose
requirements on a grant that go beyond specifying how the money should be
spent. A requirement that is not such a specification is not a condition, but
a regulation, which is valid only if it falls within one of Congress'
delegated regulatory powers." _Id.,_ at 19-20.

26

This approach harks back to _United States v. Butler,_ 297 U.S. 1, 56 S.Ct.
312, 80 L.Ed. 477 (1936), the last case in which this Court struck down an Act
of Congress as beyond the authority granted by the Spending Clause. There the
Court wrote that "[t]here is an obvious difference between a statute stating
the conditions upon which moneys shall be expended and one effective only upon
assumption of a contractual obligation to submit to a regulation which
otherwise could not be enforced." _Id.,_ at 73, 56 S.Ct., at 322. The _Butler_
Court saw the Agricultural Adjustment Act for what it was--an exercise of
regulatory, not spending, power. The error in _Butler_ was not the Court's
conclusion that the Act was essentially regulatory, but rather its crabbed
view of the extent of Congress' regulatory power under the Commerce Clause.
The Agricultural Adjustment Act was regulatory but it was regulation that
today would likely be considered within Congress' commerce power. See, _e.g.,
Katzenbach v. McClung,_ 379 U.S. 294, 85 S.Ct. 377, 13 L.Ed.2d 290 (1964);
_Wickard v. Filburn,_ 317 U.S. 111, 63 S.Ct. 82, 87 L.Ed. 122 (1942).

27

While _Butler's_ authority is questionable insofar as it assumes that Congress
has no regulatory power over farm production, its discussion of the spending
power and its description of both the power's breadth and its limitations
remain sound. The Court's decision in _Butler_ also properly recognizes the
gravity of the task of appropriately limiting the spending power. If the
spending power is to be limited only by Congress' notion of the general
welfare, the reality, given the vast financial resources of the Federal
Government, is that the Spending Clause gives "power to the Congress to tear
down the barriers, to invade the states' jurisdiction, and to become a
parliament of the whole people, subject to no restrictions save such as are
self-imposed." _United States v. Butler, supra,_ 297 U.S., at 78, 56 S.Ct., at
324. This, of course, as _Butler_ held, was not the Framers' plan and it is
not the meaning of the Spending Clause.

28

Our later cases are consistent with the notion that, under the spending power,
the Congress may only condition grants in ways that can fairly be said to be
related to the expenditure of federal funds. For example, in _Oklahoma v.
CSC,_ 330 U.S. 127, 67 S.Ct. 544, 91 L.Ed. 794 (1947), the Court upheld
application of the Hatch Act to a member of the Oklahoma State Highway
Commission who was employed in connection with an activity financed in part by
loans and grants from a federal agency. This condition is appropriately viewed
as a condition relating to how federal moneys were to be expended. Other
conditions that have been upheld by the Court may be viewed as independently
justified under some regulatory power of the Congress. Thus, in _Fullilove v.
Klutznick,_ 448 U.S. 448, 100 S.Ct. 2758, 65 L.Ed.2d 902 (1980), the Court
upheld a condition on federal grants that 10% of the money be "set aside" for
contracts with minority business enterprises. But the Court found that the
condition could be justified as a valid regulation under the commerce power
and § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment. _Id.,_ at 476, 478, 100 S.Ct., at 2775.
See also _Lau v. Nichols,_ 414 U.S. 563, 94 S.Ct. 786, 787, 39 L.Ed.2d 1
(1974) (upholding nondiscrimination provisions applied to local schools
receiving federal funds).

29

This case, however, falls into neither class. As discussed above, a condition
that a State will raise its drinking age to 21 cannot fairly be said to be
reasonably related to the expenditure of funds for highway construction. The
only possible connection, highway safety, has nothing to do with how the funds
Congress has appropriated are expended. Rather than a condition determining
how federal highway money shall be expended, it is a regulation determining
who shall be able to drink liquor. As such it is not justified by the spending
power.

30

Of the other possible sources of congressional authority for regulating the
sale of liquor only the commerce power comes to mind. But in my view, the
regulation of the age of the purchasers of liquor, just as the regulation of
the price at which liquor may be sold, falls squarely within the scope of
those powers reserved to the States by the Twenty-first Amendment. _Capital
Cities Cable, Inc. v. Crisp,_ 467 U.S. 691, 716, 104 S.Ct. 2694, 2709, 81
L.Ed.2d 580 (1984). As I emphasized in _324 Liquor Corp. v. Duffy,_ 479 U.S.
335, 356, 107 S.Ct. 720, 732, 93 L.Ed.2d 667 (1987) (dissenting opinion):

31

"The history of the Amendment strongly supports Justice Black's view that the
Twenty-first Amendment was intended to return absolute control of the liquor
trade to the States, and that the Federal Government could not use its
Commerce Clause powers to interfere in any manner with the States' exercise of
the power conferred by the Amendment."

32

Accordingly, Congress simply lacks power under the Commerce Clause to displace
state regulation of this kind. _Ibid._

33

The immense size and power of the Government of the United States ought not
obscure its fundamental character. It remains a Government of enumerated
powers. _McCulloch v. Maryland,_ 4 Wheat. 316, 405, 4 L.Ed. 579 (1819).
Because 23 U.S.C. § 158 (1982 ed., Supp. III) cannot be justified as an
exercise of any power delegated to the Congress, it is not authorized by the
Constitution. The Court errs in holding it to be the law of the land, and I
respectfully dissent.

1

Section 2 of the Twenty-first Amendment provides: "The transportation or
importation into any State, Territory, or possession of the United States for
delivery or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the laws
thereof, is hereby prohibited."

2

The level of deference to the congressional decision is such that the Court
has more recently questioned whether "general welfare" is a judicially
enforceable restriction at all. See _Buckley v. Valeo,_ 424 U.S. 1, 90-91, 96
S.Ct. 612, 668-669, 46 L.Ed.2d 659 (1976) _(per curiam)_.

3

Our cases have not required that we define the outer bounds of the
"germaneness" or "relatedness" limitation on the imposition of conditions
under the spending power. _Amici_ urge that we take this occasion to establish
that a condition on federal funds is legitimate only if it relates directly to
the purpose of the expenditure to which it is attached. See Brief for National
Conference of State Legislatures et al. as _Amici Curiae_ 10\. Because
petitioner has not sought such a restriction, see Tr. of Oral Arg. 19-21, and
because we find any such limitation on conditional federal grants satisfied in
this case in any event, we do not address whether conditions less directly
related to the particular purpose of the expenditure might be outside the
bounds of the spending power.

