**545 U.S. 844 (2005)**

# McCREARY COUNTY, KENTUCKY, ET AL.  
v.  
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION OF KENTUCKY ET AL.

No. 03-1693.

**Supreme Court of United States.**

Argued March 2, 2005. Decided June 27, 2005.

*849 _Mathew D. Staver_ argued the cause for petitioners. With him on the briefs were _Erik W. Stanley, Rena M. Lindevaldsen, Bruce W. Green,_ and _Mary E. McAlister._

_Acting Solicitor General Clement_ argued the cause for the United States as
_amicus curiae_ urging reversal. With him on the brief were _Assistant
Attorney General Keisler, Deputy Assistant Attorney General Katsas, Patricia
A. Millett, Robert M. Loeb,_ and _Lowell V. Sturgill, Jr._

_David A. Friedman_ argued the cause for respondents. With him on the brief
were _Lili R. Lutgens_ and _Steven R. Shapiro._ [*]

*850 JUSTICE SOUTER delivered the opinion of the Court.

Executives of two counties posted a version of the Ten Commandments on the
walls of their courthouses. After suits were filed charging violations of the
Establishment Clause, the legislative body of each county adopted a resolution
calling for a more extensive exhibit meant to show that the Commandments are
Kentucky's "precedent legal code," Def. Exh. 1 in Memorandum in Support of
Defendants' Motion to Dismiss in Civ. Action No. 99-507, p. 1 (ED Ky.)
(hereinafter Def. Exh. 1). The result in each instance was a modified display
of the Commandments surrounded by texts containing religious references as
their sole common element. After changing counsel, the counties revised the
exhibits again by eliminating some documents, expanding the text set out in
another, and adding some new ones.

The issues are whether a determination of the counties' purpose is a sound
basis for ruling on the Establishment Clause complaints, and whether
evaluation of the counties' claim of secular purpose for the ultimate displays
may take their evolution into account. We hold that the counties' manifest
objective may be dispositive of the constitutional *851 enquiry, and that the
development of the presentation should be considered when determining its
purpose.

## I

In the summer of 1999, petitioners McCreary County and Pulaski County,
Kentucky (hereinafter Counties), put up in their respective courthouses large,
gold-framed copies of an abridged text of the King James version of the Ten
Commandments, including a citation to the Book of Exodus.[1] In McCreary
County, the placement of the Commandments responded to an order of the county
legislative body requiring "the display [to] be posted in `a very high traffic
area' of the courthouse." 96 F. Supp. 2d 679, 684 (ED Ky. 2000). In Pulaski
County, amidst reported controversy over the propriety of the display, the
Commandments were hung in a ceremony presided over by the county Judge-
Executive, who called them "good rules to live by" and who recounted the story
of an astronaut who became convinced "there must be a divine God" after
viewing the Earth from the moon. Dodson, Commonwealth Journal, July 25, 1999,
p. A1, col. 2, in Memorandum in Support of Plaintiffs' Motion for Preliminary
Injunction in Civ. Action No. 99-509 (ED Ky.) (internal quotation marks
omitted). The Judge-Executive was accompanied by the pastor of his church, who
called the Commandments "a creed of ethics" and told the press after the
ceremony that displaying the Commandments was "one of the greatest things the
judge could have done to close out the millennium." _Id.,_ at A2, col. 3
(internal quotation marks omitted). In both Counties, this was the version of
the Commandments posted:

> "Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

> *852 "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven images.

> "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.

> "Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

> "Honor thy father and thy mother.

> "Thou shalt not kill.

> "Thou shalt not commit adultery.

> "Thou shalt not steal.

> "Thou shalt not bear false witness.

> "Thou shalt not covet.

> "Exodus 20:3-17."[2] Def. Exh. 9 in Memorandum in Support of Defendants'
> Motion to Dismiss in Civ. Action No. 99-507 (ED Ky.) (hereinafter Def. Exh.
> 9).

In each County, the hallway display was "readily visible to . . . county
citizens who use the courthouse to conduct their civic business, to obtain or
renew driver's licenses and permits, to register cars, to pay local taxes, and
to register to vote." 96 F. Supp. 2d, at 684; _American Civil Liberties Union
of Kentucky_ v. _Pulaski County,_ 96 F. Supp. 2d 691, 695 (ED Ky. 2000).

In November 1999, respondents American Civil Liberties Union of Kentucky et
al. sued the Counties in Federal District Court under Rev. Stat. § 1979, 42 U.
S. C. § 1983, and sought a preliminary injunction against maintaining the
displays, which the ACLU charged were violations of the prohibition of
religious establishment included in the First Amendment of the
Constitution.[3] Within a month, and before *853 the District Court had
responded to the request for injunction, the legislative body of each County
authorized a second, expanded display, by nearly identical resolutions
reciting that the Ten Commandments are "the precedent legal code upon which
the civil and criminal codes of . . . Kentucky are founded," and stating
several grounds for taking that position: that "the Ten Commandments are
codified in Kentucky's civil and criminal laws"; that the Kentucky House of
Representatives had in 1993 "voted unanimously . . . to adjourn . . . `in
remembrance and honor of Jesus Christ, the Prince of Ethics'"; that the
"County Judge and . . . magistrates agree with the arguments set out by Judge
[Roy] Moore" in defense of his "display [of] the Ten Commandments in his
courtroom"; and that the "Founding Father[s] [had an] explicit understanding
of the duty of elected officials to publicly acknowledge God as the source of
America's strength and direction." Def. Exh. 1, at 1-3, 6.

As directed by the resolutions, the Counties expanded the displays of the Ten
Commandments in their locations, presumably along with copies of the
resolution, which instructed that it, too, be posted, _id.,_ at 9. In addition
to the first display's large framed copy of the edited King James version of
the Commandments,[4] the second included eight other documents in smaller
frames, each either having a religious *854 theme or excerpted to highlight a
religious element. The documents were the "endowed by their Creator" passage
from the Declaration of Independence; the Preamble to the Constitution of
Kentucky; the national motto, "In God We Trust"; a page from the Congressional
Record of February 2, 1983, proclaiming the Year of the Bible and including a
statement of the Ten Commandments; a proclamation by President Abraham Lincoln
designating April 30, 1863, a National Day of Prayer and Humiliation; an
excerpt from President Lincoln's "Reply to Loyal Colored People of Baltimore
upon Presentation of a Bible," reading that "[t]he Bible is the best gift God
has ever given to man"; a proclamation by President Reagan marking 1983 the
Year of the Bible; and the Mayflower Compact. 96 F. Supp. 2d, at 684; 96 F.
Supp. 2d, at 695-696.

After argument, the District Court entered a preliminary injunction on May 5,
2000, ordering that the "display ... be removed from [each] County Courthouse
IMMEDIATELY" and that no county official "erect or cause to be erected similar
displays." 96 F. Supp. 2d, at 691; 96 F. Supp. 2d, at 702-703. The court's
analysis of the situation followed the three-part formulation first stated in
_Lemon_ v. _Kurtzman,_ 403 U. S. 602 (1971). As to governmental purpose, it
concluded that the original display "lack[ed] any secular purpose" because the
Commandments "are a distinctly religious document, believed by many Christians
and Jews to be the direct and revealed word of God." 96 F. Supp. 2d, at 686;
96 F. Supp. 2d, at 698. Although the Counties had maintained that the original
display was meant to be educational, "[t]he narrow scope of the displaya
single religious text unaccompanied by any interpretation explaining its role
as a foundational documentcan hardly be said to present meaningfully the
story of this country's religious traditions." 96 F. Supp. 2d, at 686-687; 96
F. Supp. 2d, at 698. The court found that the second version also "clearly
lack[ed] a secular purpose" because the "Count[ies] narrowly tailored [their]
selection of *855 foundational documents to incorporate only those with
specific references to Christianity."[5] 96 F. Supp. 2d, at 687; 96 F. Supp.
2d, at 699.

The Counties filed a notice of appeal from the preliminary injunction but
voluntarily dismissed it after hiring new lawyers. They then installed another
display in each court-house, the third within a year. No new resolution
authorized this one, nor did the Counties repeal the resolutions that preceded
the second. The posting consists of nine framed documents of equal size, one
of them setting out the Ten Commandments explicitly identified as the "King
James Version" at Exodus 20:3-17, 145 F. Supp. 2d 845, 847 (ED Ky. 2001), and
quoted at greater length than before:

> "Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

> "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any
> thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is
> in the water under-neath the earth: Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them,
> nor serve them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the
> iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
> generation of them that hate me.

> "Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in vain: for the LORD will
> not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

> "Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.

> "Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land
> which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

> "Thou shalt not kill.

> *856 "Thou shalt not commit adultery.

> "Thou shalt not steal.

> "Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.

> "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet th[y]
> neighbor's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor
> his ass, nor anything that is th[y] neighbour's." App. to Pet. for Cert.
> 189a.

Assembled with the Commandments are framed copies of the Magna Carta, the
Declaration of Independence, the Bill of Rights, the lyrics of the Star
Spangled Banner, the May-flower Compact, the National Motto, the Preamble to
the Kentucky Constitution, and a picture of Lady Justice. The collection is
entitled "The Foundations of American Law and Government Display" and each
document comes with a statement about its historical and legal significance.
The comment on the Ten Commandments reads:

> "The Ten Commandments have profoundly influenced the formation of Western
> legal thought and the formation of our country. That influence is clearly
> seen in the Declaration of Independence, which declared that `We hold these
> truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are
> endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these
> are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.' The Ten Commandments
> provide the moral background of the Declaration of Independence and the
> foundation of our legal tradition." _Id.,_ at 180a.

The ACLU moved to supplement the preliminary injunction to enjoin the
Counties' third display,[6] and the Counties responded with several
explanations for the new version, including *857 desires "to demonstrate that
the Ten Commandments were part of the foundation of American Law and
Government" and "to educate the citizens of the county regarding some of the
documents that played a significant role in the foundation of our system of
law and government." 145 F. Supp. 2d, at 848 (internal quotation marks
omitted). The court, however, took the objective of proclaiming the
Commandments' foundational value as "a religious, rather than secular,
purpose" under _Stone_ v. _Graham,_ 449 U. S. 39 (1980) _(per curiam),_ 145 F.
Supp. 2d, at 849, and found that the assertion that the Counties' broader
educational goals are secular "crumble[s] ... upon an examination of the
history of this litigation," _ibid._ In light of the Counties' decision to
post the Commandments by themselves in the first instance, contrary to
_Stone,_ and later to "accentuat[e]" the religious objective by surrounding
the Commandments with "specific references to Christianity," the District
Court understood the Counties' "clear" purpose as being to post the
Commandments, not to educate.[7] 145 F. Supp. 2d, at 849-850 (internal
quotation marks omitted).

As requested, the trial court supplemented the injunction, and a divided panel
of the Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed. The Circuit majority
stressed that under _Stone,_ displaying the Commandments bespeaks a religious
object unless they are integrated with other material so as to carry "a
secular message," 354 F. 3d 438, 449 (2003). The majority judges saw no
integration here because of a "lack of a demonstrated analytical or historical
connection [between *858 the Commandments and] the other documents." _Id.,_ at
451. They noted in particular that the Counties offered no support for their
claim that the Ten Commandments "provide[d] the moral backdrop" to the
Declaration of Independence or otherwise "profoundly influenced" it. _Ibid._
(internal quotation marks omitted). The majority found that the Counties'
purpose was religious, not educational, given the nature of the Commandments
as "an active symbol of religion [stating] `the religious duties of
believers.'" _Id.,_ at 455. The judges in the majority understood the
identical displays to emphasize "a single religious influence, with no mention
of any other religious or secular influences," _id.,_ at 454, and they took
the very history of the litigation as evidence of the Counties' religious
objective, _id.,_ at 457.

Judge Ryan dissented on the basis of wide recognition that religion, and the
Ten Commandments in particular, have played a foundational part in the
evolution of American law and government; he saw no reason to gainsay the
Counties' claim of secular purposes. _Id.,_ at 472-473. The dissent denied
that the prior displays should have any bearing on the constitutionality of
the current one: a "history of unconstitutional displays can[not] be used as a
sword to strike down an otherwise constitutional display."[8] _Id.,_ at 478.

We granted certiorari, 543 U. S. 924 (2004), and now affirm.

##  *859 II

Twenty-five years ago in a case prompted by posting the Ten Commandments in
Kentucky's public schools, this Court recognized that the Commandments "are
undeniably a sacred text in the Jewish and Christian faiths" and held that
their display in public classrooms violated the First Amendment's bar against
establishment of religion. _Stone,_ 449 U. S., at 41. _Stone_ found a
predominantly religious purpose in the government's posting of the
Commandments, given their prominence as "`an instrument of religion,'" _id.,_
at 41, n. 3 (quoting _School Dist. of Abington Township_ v. _Schempp,_ 374 U.
S. 203, 224 (1963)). The Counties ask for a different approach here by arguing
that official purpose is unknowable and the search for it inherently vain. In
the alternative, the Counties would avoid the District Court's conclusion by
having us limit the scope of the purpose enquiry so severely that any trivial
rationalization would suffice, under a standard oblivious to the history of
religious government action like the progression of exhibits in this case.

## A

Ever since _Lemon_ v. _Kurtzman_ summarized the three familiar considerations
for evaluating Establishment Clause claims, looking to whether government
action has "a secular legislative purpose" has been a common, albeit seldom
dispositive, element of our cases. 403 U. S., at 612. Though we have found
government action motivated by an illegitimate purpose only four times since
_Lemon,_ [9] and "the secular purpose requirement alone may rarely be
determinative . . ., it nevertheless serves an important function."[10]
_Wallace_ v. *860 _Jaffree,_ 472 U. S. 38, 75 (1985) (O'CONNOR, J., concurring
in judgment).

The touchstone for our analysis is the principle that the "First Amendment
mandates governmental neutrality between religion and religion, and between
religion and nonreligion." _Epperson_ v. _Arkansas,_ 393 U. S. 97, 104 (1968);
_Everson_ v. _Board of Ed. of Ewing,_ 330 U. S. 1, 15-16 (1947); _Wallace,
supra,_ at 53. When the government acts with the ostensible and predominant
purpose of advancing religion, it violates that central Establishment Clause
value of official religious neutrality, there being no neutrality when the
government's ostensible object is to take sides. _Corporation of Presiding
Bishop of Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints_ v. _Amos,_ 483 U. S.
327, 335 (1987) (" _Lemon_ 's `purpose' requirement aims at preventing
[government] from abandoning neutrality and acting with the intent of
promoting a particular point of view in religious matters"). Manifesting a
purpose to favor one faith over another, or adherence to religion generally,
clashes with the "understanding, reached . . . after decades of religious war,
that liberty and social stability demand a religious tolerance that respects
the religious views of all citizens ...." _Zelman_ v. _Simmons-Harris,_ 536 U.
S. 639, 718 (2002) (BREYER, J., dissenting). By showing a purpose to favor
religion, the government "sends the . . . message to . . . nonadherents `that
they are outsiders, not full members of the political community, and an
accompanying message to adherents that they are insiders, favored members . .
. .'" _Santa Fe Independent School Dist._ v. _Doe,_ 530 U. S. 290, 309-310
(2000) (quoting _Lynch_ v. _Donnelly,_ 465 U. S. 668, 688 (1984) (O'CONNOR,
J., concurring)).

Indeed, the purpose apparent from government action can have an impact more
significant than the result expressly *861 decreed: when the government
maintains Sunday closing laws, it advances religion only minimally because
many working people would take the day as one of rest regardless, but if the
government justified its decision with a stated desire for all Americans to
honor Christ, the divisive thrust of the official action would be inescapable.
This is the teaching of _McGowan_ v. _Maryland,_ 366 U. S. 420 (1961), which
upheld Sunday closing statutes on practical, secular grounds after finding
that the government had forsaken the religious purposes behind centuries-old
predecessor laws. _Id.,_ at 449-451.

## B

Despite the intuitive importance of official purpose to the realization of
Establishment Clause values, the Counties ask us to abandon _Lemon_ 's purpose
test, or at least to truncate any enquiry into purpose here. Their first
argument is that the very consideration of purpose is deceptive: according to
them, true "purpose" is unknowable, and its search merely an excuse for courts
to act selectively and unpredictably in picking out evidence of subjective
intent. The assertions are as seismic as they are unconvincing.

Examination of purpose is a staple of statutory interpretation that makes up
the daily fare of every appellate court in the country, _e. g.,_ _General
Dynamics Land Systems, Inc._ v. _Cline,_ 540 U. S. 581, 600 (2004)
(interpreting statute in light of its "text, structure, purpose, and
history"), and governmental purpose is a key element of a good deal of
constitutional doctrine, _e. g.,_ _Washington_ v. _Davis,_ 426 U. S. 229
(1976) (discriminatory purpose required for Equal Protection violation);
_Hunt_ v. _Washington State Apple Advertising Comm'n,_ 432 U. S. 333, 352-353
(1977) (discriminatory purpose relevant to dormant Commerce Clause claim);
_Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc._ v. _Hialeah,_ 508 U. S. 520 (1993)
(discriminatory purpose raises level of scrutiny required by free exercise
claim). With enquiries into purpose this common, if they were nothing but
hunts for mares' nests deflecting *862 attention from bare judicial will, the
whole notion of purpose in law would have dropped into disrepute long ago.

But scrutinizing purpose does make practical sense, as in Establishment Clause
analysis, where an understanding of official objective emerges from readily
discoverable fact, without any judicial psychoanalysis of a drafter's heart of
hearts. _Wallace,_ 472 U. S., at 74 (O'CONNOR, J., concurring in judgment).
The eyes that look to purpose belong to an "`objective observer,'" one who
takes account of the traditional external signs that show up in the "`text,
legislative history, and implementation of the statute,'" or comparable
official act. _Santa Fe, supra,_ at 308 (quoting _Wallace, supra,_ at 76
(O'CONNOR, J., concurring in judgment)); see also _Edwards_ v. _Aguillard,_
482 U. S. 578, 594-595 (1987) (enquiry looks to "plain meaning of the
statute's words, enlightened by their context and the contemporaneous
legislative history [and] the historical context of the statute, . . . and the
specific sequence of events leading to [its] passage"). There is, then,
nothing hinting at an unpredictable or disingenuous exercise when a court
enquires into purpose after a claim is raised under the Establishment Clause.

The cases with findings of a predominantly religious purpose point to the
straightforward nature of the test. In _Wallace,_ for example, we inferred
purpose from a change of wording from an earlier statute to a later one, each
dealing with prayer in schools. 472 U. S., at 58-60. And in _Edwards,_ we
relied on a statute's text and the detailed public comments of its sponsor,
when we sought the purpose of a state law requiring creationism to be taught
alongside evolution. 482 U. S., at 586-588. In other cases, the government
action itself bespoke the purpose, as in _Abington,_ where the object of
required Bible study in public schools was patently religious, 374 U. S., at
223-224; in _Stone,_ the Court held that the "[p]osting of religious texts on
the wall serve[d] no . . . educational function," and found that if "the
posted copies of the Ten Commandments [were] to have any effect at all, it
*863 [would] be to induce the schoolchildren to read, meditate upon, perhaps
to venerate and obey, the Commandments." 449 U. S., at 42. In each case, the
government's action was held unconstitutional only because openly available
data supported a commonsense conclusion that a religious objective permeated
the government's action.

Nor is there any indication that the enquiry is rigged in practice to finding
a religious purpose dominant every time a case is filed. In the past, the test
has not been fatal very often, presumably because government does not
generally act unconstitutionally, with the predominant purpose of advancing
religion. That said, one consequence of the corollary that Establishment
Clause analysis does not look to the veiled psyche of government officers
could be that in some of the cases in which establishment complaints failed,
savvy officials had disguised their religious intent so cleverly that the
objective observer just missed it. But that is no reason for great
constitutional concern. If someone in the government hides religious motive so
well that the "`objective observer, acquainted with the text, legislative
history, and implementation of the statute,'" _Santa Fe,_ 530 U. S., at 308
(quoting _Wallace, supra,_ at 76 (O'CONNOR, J., concurring in judgment)),
cannot see it, then without something more the government does not make a
divisive announcement that in itself amounts to taking religious sides. A
secret motive stirs up no strife and does nothing to make outsiders of
nonadherents, and it suffices to wait and see whether such government action
turns out to have (as it may even be likely to have) the illegitimate effect
of advancing religion.

## C

After declining the invitation to abandon concern with purpose wholesale, we
also have to avoid the Counties' alternative tack of trivializing the enquiry
into it. The Counties would read the cases as if the purpose enquiry were so
naive that any transparent claim to secularity would satisfy it, and *864 they
would cut context out of the enquiry, to the point of ignoring history, no
matter what bearing it actually had on the significance of current
circumstances. There is no precedent for the Counties' arguments, or reason
supporting them.

## 1

_Lemon_ said that government action must have "a secular. . . purpose," 403 U.
S., at 612, and after a host of cases it is fair to add that although a
legislature's stated reasons will generally get deference, the secular purpose
required has to be genuine, not a sham, and not merely secondary to a
religious objective. See, _e. g.,_ _Santa Fe, supra,_ at 308 ("When a
governmental entity professes a secular purpose for an arguably religious
policy, the government's characterization is, of course, entitled to some
deference. But it is nonetheless the duty of the courts to `distinguis[h] a
sham secular purpose from a sincere one'"); _Edwards,_ 482 U. S., at 586-587
("While the Court is normally deferential to a State's articulation of a
secular purpose, it is required that the statement of such purpose be sincere
and not a sham"); _id.,_ at 590, 594 (referring to enquiry as one into
"preeminent" or "primary" purpose); _Stone, supra,_ at 41 (looking to the
"pre-eminent purpose" of government action).

Even the Counties' own cited authority confirms that we have not made the
purpose test a pushover for any secular claim. True, _Wallace_ said government
action is tainted by its object "if it is entirely motivated by a purpose to
advance religion," 472 U. S., at 56, a remark that suggests, in isolation, a
fairly complaisant attitude. But in that very case the Court declined to
credit Alabama's stated secular rationale of "accommodation" for legislation
authorizing a period of silence in school for meditation or voluntary prayer,
given the implausibility of that explanation in light of another statute
already accommodating children wishing to pray. _Id.,_ at 57, n. 45 (internal
quotation marks omitted). And it would *865 be just as much a mistake to infer
that a timid standard underlies the statement in _Lynch_ v. _Donnelly_ that
the purpose enquiry looks to whether government "activity was motivated wholly
by religious considerations," 465 U. S., at 680; for two cases cited for that
proposition had examined and rejected claims of secular purposes that turned
out to be implausible or inadequate:[11] _Stone, supra,_ at 41; _Abington,_
374 U. S., at 223-224.[12] See also _Bowen_ v. _Kendrick,_ 487 U. S. 589, 602
(1988) (using the "motivated wholly by an impermissible purpose" language, but
citing _Lynch_ and _Stone_ ). As we said, the Court often does accept
governmental statements of purpose, in keeping with the respect owed in the
first instance to such official claims. But in those unusual cases where the
claim was an apparent sham, or the secular purpose secondary, the unsurprising
results have been findings of no adequate secular object, as against a
predominantly religious one.[13]

##  *866 2

The Counties' second proffered limitation can be dispatched quickly. They
argue that purpose in a case like this one should be inferred, if at all, only
from the latest news about the last in a series of governmental actions,
however close they may all be in time and subject. But the world is not made
brand new every morning, and the Counties are simply asking us to ignore
perfectly probative evidence; they want an absentminded objective observer,
not one presumed to be familiar with the history of the government's actions
and competent to learn what history has to show, _Santa Fe,_ 530 U. S., at 308
(objective observer is familiar with "`implementation of'" government action
(quoting _Wallace, supra,_ at 76 (O'CONNOR, J., concurring in judgment)));
_Edwards, supra,_ at 595 (enquiry looks to "the historical context of the
statute ... and the specific sequence of events leading to [its] passage");
_Capitol Square Review and Advisory Bd._ v. _Pinette,_ 515 U. S. 753, 780
(1995) (O'CONNOR, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) ("[T]he
reasonable observer in the endorsement inquiry must be deemed aware of the
history and context of the community and forum in which the religious display
appears"). The Counties' position just bucks common sense: reasonable
observers have reasonable memories, and our precedents sensibly forbid an
observer "to turn a blind eye to the context in which [the] policy arose."[14]
_Santa Fe, supra,_ at 315.

##  *867 III

This case comes to us on appeal from a preliminary injunction. We accordingly
review the District Court's legal rulings _de novo,_ and its ultimate
conclusion for abuse of discretion.[15] _Ashcroft_ v. _American Civil
Liberties Union,_ 542 U. S. 656 (2004).

We take _Stone_ as the initial legal benchmark, our only case dealing with the
constitutionality of displaying the Commandments. _Stone_ recognized that the
Commandments are an "instrument of religion" and that, at least on the facts
before it, the display of their text could presumptively be understood as
meant to advance religion: although state law specifically required their
posting in public school classrooms, their isolated exhibition did not leave
room even for an argument that secular education explained their being there.
449 U. S., at 41, n. 3 (internal quotation marks omitted). But _Stone_ did not
purport to decide the constitutionality of every possible way the Commandments
might be set out by the government, and under the Establishment Clause detail
is key. _County of Allegheny_ v. _American Civil Liberties Union, Greater
Pittsburgh Chapter,_ 492 U. S. 573, 595 *868 (1989) (opinion of Blackmun, J.)
("[T]he question is what viewers may fairly understand to be the purpose of
the display. That inquiry, of necessity, turns upon the context in which the
contested object appears" (internal quotation marks and citation omitted)).
Hence, we look to the record of evidence showing the progression leading up to
the third display of the Commandments.

## A

The display rejected in _Stone_ had two obvious similarities to the first one
in the sequence here: both set out a text of the Commandments as distinct from
any traditionally symbolic representation, and each stood alone, not part of
an arguably secular display. _Stone_ stressed the significance of integrating
the Commandments into a secular scheme to forestall the broadcast of an
otherwise clearly religious message, 449 U. S., at 42, and for good reason,
the Commandments being a central point of reference in the religious and moral
history of Jews and Christians. They proclaim the existence of a monotheistic
god (no other gods). They regulate details of religious obligation (no graven
images, no sabbath breaking, no vain oath swearing). And they unmistakably
rest even the universally accepted prohibitions (as against murder, theft, and
the like) on the sanction of the divinity proclaimed at the beginning of the
text. Displaying that text is thus different from a symbolic depiction, like
tablets with 10 roman numerals, which could be seen as alluding to a general
notion of law, not a sectarian conception of faith. Where the text is set out,
the insistence of the religious message is hard to avoid in the absence of a
context plausibly suggesting a message going beyond an excuse to promote the
religious point of view. The display in _Stone_ had no context that might have
indicated an object beyond the religious character of the text, and the
Counties' solo exhibit here did nothing more to counter the sectarian
implication than the *869 postings at issue in _Stone._ [16] See also _County
of Allegheny, supra,_ at 598 ("Here, unlike in _Lynch_ [v. _Donnelly_ ],
nothing in the context of the display detracts from the crèche's religious
message"). Actually, the posting by the Counties lacked even the _Stone_
display's implausible disclaimer that the Commandments were set out to show
their effect on the civil law.[17] What is more, at the ceremony for posting
the framed Commandments in Pulaski County, the county executive was
accompanied by his pastor, who testified to the certainty of the existence of
God. The reasonable observer could only think that the Counties meant to
emphasize and celebrate the Commandments' religious message.

This is not to deny that the Commandments have had influence on civil or
secular law; a major text of a majority religion is bound to be felt. The
point is simply that the original text viewed in its entirety is an
unmistakably religious statement dealing with religious obligations and with
morality subject to religious sanction. When the government initiates an
effort to place this statement alone in public view, a religious object is
unmistakable.

## B

Once the Counties were sued, they modified the exhibits and invited additional
insight into their purpose in a display that hung for about six months. This
new one was the product of forthright and nearly identical Pulaski and
McCreary County resolutions listing a series of American historical documents
with theistic and Christian references, which *870 were to be posted in order
to furnish a setting for displaying the Ten Commandments and any "other
Kentucky and American historical documen[t]" without raising concern about
"any Christian or religious references" in them. Def. Exh. 1, at 1. As
mentioned, the resolutions expressed support for an Alabama judge who posted
the Commandments in his courtroom, and cited the fact the Kentucky Legislature
once adjourned a session in honor of "Jesus Christ, the Prince of Ethics."
_Id.,_ at 2-3.

In this second display, unlike the first, the Commandments were not hung in
isolation, merely leaving the Counties' purpose to emerge from the pervasively
religious text of the Commandments themselves. Instead, the second version was
required to include the statement of the government's purpose expressly set
out in the county resolutions, and underscored it by juxtaposing the
Commandments to other documents with highlighted references to God as their
sole common element. The display's unstinting focus was on religious passages,
showing that the Counties were posting the Commandments precisely because of
their sectarian content. That demonstration of the government's objective was
enhanced by serial religious references and the accompanying resolution's
claim about the embodiment of ethics in Christ. Together, the display and
resolution presented an indisputable, and undisputed, showing of an
impermissible purpose.

Today, the Counties make no attempt to defend their undeniable objective, but
instead hopefully describe version two as "dead and buried." Reply Brief for
Petitioners 15. Their refusal to defend the second display is understandable,
but the reasonable observer could not forget it.

## C

## 1

After the Counties changed lawyers, they mounted a third display, without a
new resolution or repeal of the old one. The result was the "Foundations of
American Law and Government" *871 exhibit, which placed the Commandments in
the company of other documents the Counties thought especially significant in
the historical foundation of American government. In trying to persuade the
District Court to lift the preliminary injunction, the Counties cited several
new purposes for the third version, including a desire "to educate the
citizens of the county regarding some of the documents that played a
significant role in the foundation of our system of law and government."[18]
145 F. Supp. 2d, at 848 (internal quotation marks omitted). The Counties'
claims did not, however, persuade the court, intimately familiar with the
details of this litigation, or the Court of Appeals, neither of which found a
legitimizing secular purpose in this third version of the display. "`When both
courts [that have already passed on the case] are unable to discern an
arguably valid secular purpose, this Court normally should hesitate to find
one.'" _Edwards,_ 482 U. S., at 594, n. 15 (quoting _Wallace,_ 472 U. S., at
66 (Powell, J., concurring)). The conclusions of the two courts preceding us
in this case are well warranted.

These new statements of purpose were presented only as a litigating position,
there being no further authorizing action by the Counties' governing boards.
And although repeal of the earlier county authorizations would not have erased
them from the record of evidence bearing on current purpose,[19] the
extraordinary resolutions for the second display passed just months earlier
were not repealed or otherwise *872 repudiated.[20] Indeed, the sectarian
spirit of the common resolution found enhanced expression in the third
display, which quoted more of the purely religious language of the
Commandments than the first two displays had done; for additions, see App. to
Pet. for Cert. 189a ("I the LORD thy God am a jealous God") (text of Second
Commandment in third display); ("the LORD will not hold him guiltless that
taketh his name in vain") (text of Third Commandment); and ("that thy days may
be long upon the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee") (text of Fifth
Commandment). No reasonable observer could swallow the claim that the Counties
had cast off the objective so unmistakable in the earlier displays.

Nor did the selection of posted material suggest a clear theme that might
prevail over evidence of the continuing religious object. In a collection of
documents said to be "foundational" to American government, it is at least odd
to include a patriotic anthem, but to omit the Fourteenth Amendment, the most
significant structural provision adopted since the original Framing. And it is
no less baffling to leave out the original Constitution of 1787 while quoting
the 1215 Magna Carta even to the point of its declaration that "fish-weirs
shall be removed from the Thames." _Id.,_ at 205a, ¶ 33. If an observer found
these choices and omissions perplexing in isolation, he would be puzzled for a
*873 different reason when he read the Declaration of Independence seeking
confirmation for the Counties' posted explanation that the Ten
Commandments'"influence is clearly seen in the Declaration," _id.,_ at 180a;
in fact the observer would find that the Commandments are sanctioned as divine
imperatives, while the Declaration of Independence holds that the authority of
government to enforce the law derives "from the consent of the governed,"
_id.,_ at 190a.[21] If the observer had not thrown up his hands, he would
probably suspect that the Counties were simply reaching for any way to keep a
religious document on the walls of courthouses constitutionally required to
embody religious neutrality.[22]

## 2

In holding the preliminary injunction adequately supported by evidence that
the Counties' purpose had not changed at the third stage, we do not decide
that the Counties' *874 past actions forever taint any effort on their part to
deal with the subject matter. We hold only that purpose needs to be taken
seriously under the Establishment Clause and needs to be understood in light
of context; an implausible claim that governmental purpose has changed should
not carry the day in a court of law any more than in a head with common sense.
It is enough to say here that district courts are fully capable of adjusting
preliminary relief to take account of genuine changes in constitutionally
significant conditions. See _Ashcroft_ v. _American Civil Liberties Union,_
542 U. S. 656 (2004).

Nor do we have occasion here to hold that a sacred text can never be
integrated constitutionally into a governmental display on the subject of law,
or American history. We do not forget, and in this litigation have frequently
been reminded, that our own courtroom frieze was deliberately designed in the
exercise of governmental authority so as to include the figure of Moses
holding tablets exhibiting a portion of the Hebrew text of the later,
secularly phrased Commandments; in the company of 17 other lawgivers, most of
them secular figures, there is no risk that Moses would strike an observer as
evidence that the National Government was violating neutrality in
religion.[23]

## IV

The importance of neutrality as an interpretive guide is no less true now than
it was when the Court broached the principle in _Everson_ v. _Board of Ed. of
Ewing,_ 330 U. S. 1 (1947), and a word needs to be said about the different
view taken in today's dissent. We all agree, of course, on the need for some
interpretative help. The First Amendment contains no textual definition of
"establishment," and the *875 term is certainly not self-defining. No one
contends that the prohibition of establishment stops at a designation of a
national (or with Fourteenth Amendment incorporation, _Cantwell_ v.
_Connecticut,_ 310 U. S. 296, 303 (1940), a state) church, but nothing in the
text says just how much more it covers. There is no simple answer, for more
than one reason.

The prohibition on establishment covers a variety of issues from prayer in
widely varying government settings, to financial aid for religious individuals
and institutions, to comment on religious questions. In these varied settings,
issues of interpreting inexact Establishment Clause language, like difficult
interpretative issues generally, arise from the tension of competing values,
each constitutionally respectable, but none open to realization to the logical
limit.

The First Amendment has not one but two clauses tied to "religion," the second
forbidding any prohibition on "the free exercise thereof," and sometimes, the
two clauses compete: spending government money on the clergy looks like
establishing religion, but if the government cannot pay for military chaplains
a good many soldiers and sailors would be kept from the opportunity to
exercise their chosen religions. See _Cutter_ v. _Wilkinson,_ 544 U. S. 709,
719 (2005). At other times, limits on governmental action that might make
sense as a way to avoid establishment could arguably limit freedom of speech
when the speaking is done under government auspices. _Rosenberger_ v. _Rector
and Visitors of Univ. of Va.,_ 515 U. S. 819 (1995). The dissent, then, is
wrong to read cases like _Walz_ v. _Tax Comm'n of City of New York,_ 397 U. S.
664 (1970), as a rejection of neutrality on its own terms, _post,_ at 891-892,
for tradeoffs are inevitable, and an elegant interpretative rule to draw the
line in all the multifarious situations is not to be had.

Given the variety of interpretative problems, the principle of neutrality has
provided a good sense of direction: the government may not favor one religion
over another, or religion over irreligion, religious choice being the
prerogative of individuals *876 under the Free Exercise Clause. The principle
has been helpful simply because it responds to one of the major concerns that
prompted adoption of the Religion Clauses. The Framers and the citizens of
their time intended not only to protect the integrity of individual conscience
in religious matters, _Wallace,_ 472 U. S., at 52-54, and n. 38, but to guard
against the civic divisiveness that follows when the government weighs in on
one side of religious debate; nothing does a better job of roiling society, a
point that needed no explanation to the descendants of English Puritans and
Cavaliers (or Massachusetts Puritans and Baptists). _E. g.,_ _Everson, supra,_
at 8 ("A large proportion of the early settlers of this country came here from
Europe to escape [religious persecution]"). A sense of the past thus points to
governmental neutrality as an objective of the Establishment Clause, and a
sensible standard for applying it. To be sure, given its generality as a
principle, an appeal to neutrality alone cannot possibly lay every issue to
rest, or tell us what issues on the margins are substantial enough for
constitutional significance, a point that has been clear from the founding era
to modern times. _E. g.,_ Letter from J. Madison to R. Adams (1832), in 5 The
Founders' Constitution 107 (P. Kurland & R. Lerner eds. 1987) ("[In calling
for separation] I must admit moreover that it may not be easy, in every
possible case, to trace the line of separation between the rights of religion
and the Civil authority with such distinctness as to avoid collisions & doubts
on unessential points"); _Sherbert_ v. _Verner,_ 374 U. S. 398, 422 (1963)
(Harlan, J., dissenting) ("The constitutional obligation of `neutrality' . . .
is not so narrow a channel that the slightest deviation from an absolutely
straight course leads to condemnation"). But invoking neutrality is a prudent
way of keeping sight of something the Framers of the First Amendment thought
important.

The dissent, however, puts forward a limitation on the application of the
neutrality principle, with citations to historical evidence said to show that
the Framers understood the *877 ban on establishment of religion as
sufficiently narrow to allow the government to espouse submission to the
divine will. The dissent identifies God as the God of monotheism, all of whose
three principal strains (Jewish, Christian, and Muslim) acknowledge the
religious importance of the Ten Commandments. _Post,_ at 893-894. On the
dissent's view, it apparently follows that even rigorous espousal of a common
element of this common monotheism is consistent with the establishment ban.

But the dissent's argument for the original understanding is flawed from the
outset by its failure to consider the full range of evidence showing what the
Framers believed. The dissent is certainly correct in putting forward evidence
that some of the Framers thought some endorsement of religion was compatible
with the establishment ban; the dissent quotes the first President as stating
that "[n]ational morality [cannot] prevail in exclusion of religious
principle," for example, _post,_ at 887 (internal quotation marks omitted),
and it cites his first Thanksgiving proclamation giving thanks to God, _post,_
at 886-887. Surely if expressions like these from Washington and his
contemporaries were all we had to go on, there would be a good case that the
neutrality principle has the effect of broadening the ban on establishment
beyond the Framers' understanding of it (although there would, of course,
still be the question of whether the historical case could overcome some 60
years of precedent taking neutrality as its guiding principle).[24]

*878 But the fact is that we do have more to go on, for there is also evidence supporting the proposition that the Framers intended the Establishment Clause to require governmental neutrality in matters of religion, including neutrality in statements acknowledging religion. The very language of the Establishment Clause represented a significant departure from early drafts that merely prohibited a single national religion, and the final language instead "extended [the] prohibition to state support for `religion' in general." See _Lee_ v. _Weisman,_ 505 U. S. 577, 614-615 (1992) (SOUTER, J., concurring) (tracing development of language).

The historical record, moreover, is complicated beyond the dissent's account
by the writings and practices of figures no less influential than Thomas
Jefferson and James Madison. Jefferson, for example, refused to issue
Thanksgiving Proclamations because he believed that they violated the
Constitution. See Letter to S. Miller (Jan. 23, 1808), in 5 The Founders'
Constitution, _supra,_ at 98. And Madison, whom the dissent claims as
supporting its thesis, _post,_ at 888, criticized Virginia's general
assessment tax not just because it required people to donate "three pence" to
religion, but because "it is itself a signal of persecution. It degrades from
the equal rank of Citizens all those whose opinions in Religion do not bend to
those of the Legislative authority." 505 U. S., at 622 (internal quotation
marks omitted); see also Letter from J. Madison to E. Livingston (July 10,
1822), in 5 The Founders' Constitution, _supra,_ at 106 ("[R]eligion & Govt.
will both exist in greater purity, the less they are mixed together"); Letter
from J. Madison to J. Adams (Sept. 1833), in Religion and Politics in the
Early Republic 120 (D. Dresibach ed. 1996) (stating that with respect to
religion and government the "tendency to a usurpation on one side, or the
other, or to a corrupting coalition or alliance between them, will be best
guarded against by an entire abstinence of the *879 Government from
interference"); _Van Orden_ v. _Perry, ante,_ at 724-725 (Stevens, J.,
dissenting).[25]

The fair inference is that there was no common understanding about the limits
of the establishment prohibition, and the dissent's conclusion that its
narrower view was the original understanding, _post,_ at 886-888, stretches
the evidence beyond tensile capacity. What the evidence does show is a group
of statesmen, like others before and after them, who proposed a guarantee with
contours not wholly worked out, leaving the Establishment Clause with edges
still to be determined. And none the worse for that. Indeterminate edges are
the kind to have in a constitution meant to endure, and to meet "exigencies
which, if foreseen at all, must have been seen dimly, and which can be best
provided for as they occur." _McCulloch_ v. _Maryland,_ 4 Wheat. 316, 415
(1819).

While the dissent fails to show a consistent original understanding from which
to argue that the neutrality principle should be rejected, it does manage to
deliver a surprise. As mentioned, the dissent says that the deity the Framers
had in mind was the God of monotheism, with the consequence that government
may espouse a tenet of traditional monotheism. This is truly a remarkable
view. Other Members of the Court have dissented on the ground that the
Establishment Clause bars nothing more than governmental preference for one
religion over another, _e. g.,_ _Wallace,_ 472 U. S., at 98-99 (REHNQUIST, J.,
dissenting), but at least religion has previously been treated inclusively.
Today's dissent, however, *880 apparently means that government should be free
to approve the core beliefs of a favored religion over the tenets of others, a
view that should trouble anyone who prizes religious liberty. Certainly
history cannot justify it; on the contrary, history shows that the religion of
concern to the Framers was not that of the monotheistic faiths generally, but
Christianity in particular, a fact that no Member of this Court takes as a
premise for construing the Religion Clauses. Justice Story probably reflected
the thinking of the framing generation when he wrote in his Commentaries that
the purpose of the Clause was "not to countenance, much less to advance,
Mahometanism, or Judaism, or infidelity, by prostrating Christianity; but to
exclude all rivalry among Christian sects." R. Cord, Separation of Church and
State: Historical Fact and Current Fiction 13 (1988) (emphasis deleted). The
Framers would, therefore, almost certainly object to the dissent's unstated
reasoning that because Christianity was a monotheistic "religion," monotheism
with Mosaic antecedents should be a touchstone of establishment
interpretation.[26] Even on originalist critiques of existing precedent there
is, it seems, no escape from interpretative consequences that would surprise
the Framers. Thus, it appears to be common ground in the interpretation of a
Constitution "intended to endure for ages to come," _McCulloch_ v. *881
_Maryland, supra,_ at 415, that applications unanticipated by the Framers are
inevitable.

Historical evidence thus supports no solid argument for changing course
(whatever force the argument might have when directed at the existing
precedent), whereas public discourse at the present time certainly raises no
doubt about the value of the interpretative approach invoked for 60 years now.
We are centuries away from the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre and the
treatment of heretics in early Massachusetts, but the divisiveness of religion
in current public life is inescapable. This is no time to deny the prudence of
understanding the Establishment Clause to require the government to stay
neutral on religious belief, which is reserved for the conscience of the
individual.

## V

Given the ample support for the District Court's finding of a predominantly
religious purpose behind the Counties' third display, we affirm the Sixth
Circuit in upholding the preliminary injunction.

_It is so ordered._

JUSTICE O'CONNOR, concurring.

I join in the Court's opinion. The First Amendment expresses our Nation's
fundamental commitment to religious liberty by means of two provisionsone
protecting the free exercise of religion, the other barring establishment of
religion. They were written by the descendents of people who had come to this
land precisely so that they could practice their religion freely. Together
with the other First Amendment guaranteesof free speech, a free press, and
the rights to assemble and petitionthe Religion Clauses were designed to
safeguard the freedom of conscience and belief that those immigrants had
sought. They embody an idea that was once considered radical: Free people are
entitled to free *882 and diverse thoughts, which government ought neither to
constrain nor to direct.

Reasonable minds can disagree about how to apply the Religion Clauses in a
given case. But the goal of the Clauses is clear: to carry out the Founders'
plan of preserving religious liberty to the fullest extent possible in a
pluralistic society. By enforcing the Clauses, we have kept religion a matter
for the individual conscience, not for the prosecutor or bureaucrat. At a time
when we see around the world the violent consequences of the assumption of
religious authority by government, Americans may count themselves fortunate:
Our regard for constitutional boundaries has protected us from similar
travails, while allowing private religious exercise to flourish. The well-
known statement that "[w]e are a religious people," _Zorach_ v. _Clauson,_ 343
U. S. 306, 313 (1952), has proved true. Americans attend their places of
worship more often than do citizens of other developed nations, R. Fowler, A.
Hertzke, & L. Olson, Religion and Politics in America 28-29 (2d ed. 1999), and
describe religion as playing an especially important role in their lives, Pew
Global Attitudes Project, Among Wealthy Nations . . . U. S. Stands Alone in
its Embrace of Religion (Dec. 19, 2002). Those who would renegotiate the
boundaries between church and state must therefore answer a difficult
question: Why would we trade a system that has served us so well for one that
has served others so poorly?

Our guiding principle has been James Madison'sthat "[t]he Religion ... of
every man must be left to the conviction and conscience of every man."
Memorial and Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 2 Writings of James
Madison 183, 184 (G. Hunt ed. 1901) (hereinafter Memorial). To that end, we
have held that the guarantees of religious freedom protect citizens from
religious incursions by the States as well as by the Federal Government.
_Everson_ v. _Board of Ed. of Ewing,_ 330 U. S. 1, 16 (1947); _Cantwell_ v.
_Connecticut,_ 310 U. S. 296 (1940). Government may not coerce a person *883
into worshiping against her will, nor prohibit her from worshiping according
to it. It may not prefer one religion over another or promote religion over
nonbelief. _Everson, supra,_ at 15-16. It may not entangle itself with
religion. _Walz_ v. _Tax Comm'n of City of New York,_ 397 U. S. 664, 674
(1970). And government may not, by "endorsing religion or a religious
practice," "mak[e] adherence to religion relevant to a person's standing in
the political community." _Wallace_ v. _Jaffree,_ 472 U. S. 38, 69 (1985)
(O'CONNOR, J., concurring in judgment).

When we enforce these restrictions, we do so for the same reason that guided
the Framersrespect for religion's special role in society. Our Founders
conceived of a Republic receptive to voluntary religious expression, and
provided for the possibility of judicial intervention when government action
threatens or impedes such expression. Voluntary religious belief and
expression may be as threatened when government takes the mantle of religion
upon itself as when government directly interferes with private religious
practices. When the government associates one set of religious beliefs with
the state and identifies nonadherents as outsiders, it encroaches upon the
individual's decision about whether and how to worship. In the marketplace of
ideas, the government has vast resources and special status. Government
religious expression therefore risks crowding out private observance and
distorting the natural interplay between competing beliefs. Allowing
government to be a potential mouthpiece for competing religious ideas risks
the sort of division that might easily spill over into suppression of rival
beliefs. Tying secular and religious authority together poses risks to both.

Given the history of this particular display of the Ten Commandments, the
Court correctly finds an Establishment Clause violation. See _ante,_ at
867-873. The purpose behind the counties' display is relevant because it
conveys an unmistakable message of endorsement to the reasonable observer.
*884 See _Lynch_ v. _Donnelly,_ 465 U. S. 668, 690 (1984) (O'CONNOR, J.,
concurring).

It is true that many Americans find the Commandments in accord with their
personal beliefs. But we do not count heads before enforcing the First
Amendment. See _West Virginia Bd. of Ed._ v. _Barnette,_ 319 U. S. 624, 638
(1943) ("The very purpose of a Bill of Rights was to withdraw certain subjects
from the vicissitudes of political controversy, to place them beyond the reach
of majorities and officials and to establish them as legal principles to be
applied by the courts"). Nor can we accept the theory that Americans who do
not accept the Commandments' validity are outside the First Amendment's
protections. There is no list of approved and disapproved beliefs appended to
the First Amendmentand the Amendment's broad terms ("free exercise,"
"establishment," "religion") do not admit of such a cramped reading. It is
true that the Framers lived at a time when our national religious diversity
was neither as robust nor as well recognized as it is now. They may not have
foreseen the variety of religions for which this Nation would eventually
provide a home. They surely could not have predicted new religions, some of
them born in this country. But they did know that line-drawing between
religions is an enterprise that, once begun, has no logical stopping point.
They worried that "the same authority which can establish Christianity, in
exclusion of all other Religions, may establish with the same ease any
particular sect of Christians, in exclusion of all other Sects." Memorial 186.
The Religion Clauses, as a result, protect adherents of all religions, as well
as those who believe in no religion at all.

## * * *

We owe our First Amendment to a generation with a profound commitment to
religion and a profound commitment to religious libertyvisionaries who held
their faith "with enough confidence to believe that what should be rendered
*885 to God does not need to be decided and collected by Caesar." _Zorach,_
343 U. S., at 324-325 (Jackson, J., dissenting). In my opinion, the display at
issue was an establishment of religion in violation of our Constitution. For
the reasons given above, I join in the Court's opinion.

JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and JUSTICE THOMAS join, and with
whom JUSTICE KENNEDY joins as to Parts II and III, dissenting.

I would uphold McCreary County and Pulaski County, Kentucky's (hereinafter
Counties) displays of the Ten Commandments. I shall discuss, first, why the
Court's oft repeated assertion that the government cannot favor religious
practice is false; second, why today's opinion extends the scope of that
falsehood even beyond prior cases; and third, why even on the basis of the
Court's false assumptions the judgment here is wrong.

## I

## A

On September 11, 2001, I was attending in Rome, Italy, an international
conference of judges and lawyers, principally from Europe and the United
States. That night and the next morning virtually all of the participants
watched, in their hotel rooms, the address to the Nation by the President of
the United States concerning the murderous attacks upon the Twin Towers and
the Pentagon, in which thousands of Americans had been killed. The address
ended, as Presidential addresses often do, with the prayer "God bless
America." The next afternoon I was approached by one of the judges from a
European country, who, after extending his profound condolences for my
country's loss, sadly observed: "How I wish that the Head of State of my
country, at a similar time of national tragedy and distress, could conclude
his address `God bless ____.' It is of course absolutely forbidden."

*886 That is one model of the relationship between church and statea model spread across Europe by the armies of Napoleon, and reflected in the Constitution of France, which begins, "France is [a] . . . secular . . . Republic." France Const., Art. 1, in 7 Constitutions of the Countries of the World, p. 1 (G. Flanz ed. 2000). Religion is to be strictly excluded from the public forum. This is not, and never was, the model adopted by America. George Washington added to the form of Presidential oath prescribed by Art. II, § 1, cl. 8, of the Constitution, the concluding words "so help me God." See Blomquist, The Presidential Oath, the American National Interest and a Call for Presiprudence, 73 UMKC L. Rev. 1, 34 (2004). The Supreme Court under John Marshall opened its sessions with the prayer, "God save the United States and this Honorable Court." 1 C. Warren, The Supreme Court in United States History 469 (rev. ed. 1926) (internal quotation marks omitted). The First Congress instituted the practice of beginning its legislative sessions with a prayer. _Marsh_ v. _Chambers,_ 463 U. S. 783, 787-788 (1983). The same week that Congress submitted the Establishment Clause as part of the Bill of Rights for ratification by the States, it enacted legislation providing for paid chaplains in the House and Senate. _Id.,_ at 788. The day after the First Amendment was proposed, the same Congress that had proposed it requested the President to proclaim "a day of public thanksgiving and prayer, to be observed, by acknowledging, with grateful hearts, the many signal favours of Almighty God." H. R. Jour., 1st Cong., 1st Sess., 123 (1826 ed.); see also Sen. Jour., 1st Sess., 88 (1820 ed.). President Washington offered the first Thanksgiving Proclamation shortly thereafter, devoting November 26, 1789, on behalf of the American people "`to the service of that great and glorious Being who is the beneficent author of all the good that was, that is, or that will be,'" _Van Orden_ v. _Perry, ante,_ at 687 (plurality opinion) (quoting President Washington's first Thanksgiving Proclamation), thus beginning a tradition of offering gratitude to *887 God that continues today. See _Wallace_ v. _Jaffree,_ 472 U. S. 38, 100-103 (1985) (REHNQUIST, J., dissenting).[1] The same Congress also reenacted the Northwest Territory Ordinance of 1787, 1 Stat. 50, Article III of which provided: "Religion, morality, and knowledge, being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind, schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged." _Id.,_ at 52, n. _(a)._ And of course the First Amendment itself accords religion (and no other manner of belief) special constitutional protection.

These actions of our First President and Congress and the Marshall Court were
not idiosyncratic; they reflected the beliefs of the period. Those who wrote
the Constitution believed that morality was essential to the well-being of
society and that encouragement of religion was the best way to foster
morality. The "fact that the Founding Fathers believed devotedly that there
was a God and that the unalienable rights of man were rooted in Him is clearly
evidenced in their writings, from the Mayflower Compact to the Constitution
itself." _School Dist. of Abington Township_ v. _Schempp,_ 374 U. S. 203, 213
(1963). See Underkuffler-Freund, The Separation of the Religious and the
Secular: A Foundational Challenge to First-Amendment Theory, 36 Wm. & Mary L.
Rev. 837, 896-918 (1995). President Washington opened his Presidency with a
prayer, see Inaugural Addresses of the Presidents of the United States 1, 2
(1989), and reminded his fellow citizens at the conclusion of it that "reason
and experience both forbid us to expect that National morality can prevail in
exclusion of religious principle," Farewell Address (1796), reprinted in 35
Writings of George Washington 229 (J. Fitzpatrick ed. 1940). President John
Adams wrote to the Massachusetts Militia, "we have no government *888 armed
with power capable of contending with human passions unbridled by morality and
religion. . . . Our Constitution was made only for a moral and religious
people. It is wholly inadequate to the government of any other." Letter (Oct.
11, 1798), reprinted in 9 Works of John Adams 229 (C. Adams ed. 1971). Thomas
Jefferson concluded his second inaugural address by inviting his audience to
pray:

> "I shall need, too, the favor of that Being in whose hands we are, who led
> our fathers, as Israel of old, from their native land and planted them in a
> country flowing with all the necessaries and comforts of life; who has
> covered our infancy with His providence and our riper years with His wisdom
> and power and to whose goodness I ask you to join in supplications with me
> that He will so enlighten the minds of your servants, guide their councils,
> and prosper their measures that whatsoever they do shall result in your
> good, and shall secure to you the peace, friendship, and approbation of all
> nations." Inaugural Addresses of the Presidents of the United States, at 18,
> 22-23.

James Madison, in his first inaugural address, likewise placed his confidence
"in the guardianship and guidance of that Almighty Being whose power regulates
the destiny of nations, whose blessings have been so conspicuously dispensed
to this rising Republic, and to whom we are bound to address our devout
gratitude for the past, as well as our fervent supplications and best hopes
for the future." _Id.,_ at 25, 28.

Nor have the views of our people on this matter significantly changed.
Presidents continue to conclude the Presidential oath with the words "so help
me God." Our legislatures, state and national, continue to open their sessions
with prayer led by official chaplains. The sessions of this Court continue to
open with the prayer "God save the United States and this Honorable Court."
Invocation of the Almighty by our public figures, at all levels of government,
*889 remains commonplace. Our coinage bears the motto, "IN GOD WE TRUST." And
our Pledge of Allegiance contains the acknowledgment that we are a Nation
"under God." As one of our Supreme Court opinions rightly observed, "We are a
religious people whose institutions presuppose a Supreme Being." _Zorach_ v.
_Clauson,_ 343 U. S. 306, 313 (1952), repeated with approval in _Lynch_ v.
_Donnelly,_ 465 U. S. 668, 675 (1984); _Marsh,_ 463 U. S., at 792; _Abington
Township, supra,_ at 213.

With all of this reality (and much more) staring it in the face, how can the
Court _possibly_ assert that the "`First Amendment mandates governmental
neutrality between . . . religion and nonreligion,'" _ante,_ at 860, and that
"[m]anifesting a purpose to favor . . . adherence to religion generally,"
_ibid.,_ is unconstitutional? Who says so? Surely not the words of the
Constitution. Surely not the history and traditions that reflect our society's
constant understanding of those words. Surely not even the current sense of
our society, recently reflected in an Act of Congress adopted _unanimously_ by
the Senate and with only five nays in the House of Representatives, see 148
Cong. Rec. 12041 (June 28, 2002); _id.,_ at 19518 (Oct. 8, 2002), criticizing
a Court of Appeals opinion that had held "under God" in the Pledge of
Allegiance unconstitutional. See Act of Nov. 13, 2002, §§ 1(9), 2(a), 3(a),
116 Stat. 2057, 2058, 2060-2061 (reaffirming the Pledge of Allegiance and the
National Motto ("In God We Trust") and stating that the Pledge of Allegiance
is "clearly consistent with the text and intent of the Constitution"). Nothing
stands behind the Court's assertion that governmental affirmation of the
society's belief in God is unconstitutional except the Court's own say-so,
citing as support only the unsubstantiated say-so of earlier Courts going back
no further than the mid-20th century. See _ante,_ at 860, citing _Corporation
of Presiding Bishop of Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints_ v. _Amos,_
483 U. S. 327, 335 (1987), in turn citing _Lemon_ v. _Kurtzman,_ 403 U. S.
602, 612 (1971), in *890 turn citing _Board of Ed. of Central School Dist. No.
1_ v. _Allen,_ 392 U. S. 236, 243 (1968), in turn quoting _Abington Township,_
374 U. S., at 222, in turn citing _Everson_ v. _Board of Ed. of Ewing,_ 330 U.
S. 1, 15 (1947).[2] And it is, moreover, a thoroughly discredited say-so. It
is discredited, to begin with, because a majority of the Justices on the
current Court (including at least one Member of today's majority) have, in
separate opinions, repudiated the brain-spun " _Lemon_ test" that embodies the
supposed principle of neutrality between religion and irreligion. See _Lamb's
Chapel_ v. _Center Moriches Union Free School Dist.,_ 508 U. S. 384, 398-399
(1993) (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment) (collecting criticism of _Lemon_
); _Van Orden, ante,_ at 692-693, 697 (THOMAS, J., concurring); _Board of Ed.
of Kiryas Joel Village School Dist._ v. _Grumet,_ 512 U. S. 687, 720 (1994)
(O'CONNOR, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment); _County of
Allegheny_ v. _American Civil Liberties Union, Greater Pittsburgh Chapter,_
492 U. S. 573, 655-656, 672-673 (1989) (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment in
part and dissenting in part); _Wallace,_ 472 U. S., at 112 (REHNQUIST, J.,
dissenting); see also _Committee for Public Ed. and Religious Liberty_ v.
_Regan,_ 444 U. S. 646, 671 (1980) (STEVENS, J., dissenting) (disparaging "the
sisyphean task of trying to patch together the `blurred, indistinct, and
variable barrier' described in _Lemon_ "). And it is discredited because the
Court has not had the courage (or the foolhardiness) to apply the neutrality
principle consistently.

What distinguishes the rule of law from the dictatorship of a shifting Supreme
Court majority is the absolutely indispensable *891 requirement that judicial
opinions be grounded in consistently applied principle. That is what prevents
judges from ruling now this way, now thatthumbs up or thumbs downas their
personal preferences dictate. Today's opinion forthrightly (or actually,
somewhat less than forthrightly) admits that it does not rest upon
consistently applied principle. In a revealing footnote, _ante,_ at 859-860,
n. 10, the Court acknowledges that the "Establishment Clause doctrine" it
purports to be applying "lacks the comfort of categorical absolutes." What the
Court means by this lovely euphemism is that sometimes the Court chooses to
decide cases on the principle that government cannot favor religion, and
sometimes it does not. The footnote goes on to say that "[i]n special
instances we have found good reason" to dispense with the principle, but "[n]o
such reasons present themselves here." _Ibid._ It does not identify all of
those "special instances," much less identify the "good reason" for their
existence.

I have cataloged elsewhere the variety of circumstances in which this
Courteven _after_ its embrace of _Lemon_ 's stated prohibition of such
behaviorhas approved government action "undertaken with the specific
intention of improving the position of religion," _Edwards_ v. _Aguillard,_
482 U. S. 578, 616 (1987) (Scalia, J., dissenting). See _id.,_ at 616-618.
Suffice it to say here that when the government relieves churches from the
obligation to pay property taxes, when it allows students to absent themselves
from public school to take religious classes, and when it exempts religious
organizations from generally applicable prohibitions of religious
discrimination, it surely means to bestow a benefit on religious practicebut
we have approved it. See _Amos, supra,_ at 338 (exemption from federal
prohibition of religious discrimination by employers); _Walz_ v. _Tax Comm'n
of City of New York,_ 397 U. S. 664, 673 (1970) (property tax exemption for
church property); _Zorach, supra,_ at 308, 315 (law permitting students to
leave public school for the purpose of *892 receiving religious education).
Indeed, we have even approved (post- _Lemon_ ) government-led prayer to God.
In _Marsh_ v. _Chambers_ _,_ the Court upheld the Nebraska State Legislature's
practice of paying a chaplain to lead it in prayer at the opening of
legislative sessions. The Court explained that "[t]o invoke Divine guidance on
a public body entrusted with making the laws is not ... an `establishment' of
religion or a step toward establishment; it is simply a tolerable
acknowledgment of beliefs widely held among the people of this country." 463
U. S., at 792. (Why, one wonders, is not respect for the Ten Commandments a
tolerable acknowledgment of beliefs widely held among the people of this
country?)

The only "good reason" for ignoring the neutrality principle set forth in any
of these cases was the antiquity of the practice at issue. See _id.,_ at
786-792, 794; _Walz, supra,_ at 676-680. That would be a good reason for
finding the neutrality principle a mistaken interpretation of the
Constitution, but it is hardly a good reason for letting an unconstitutional
practice continue. We did not hide behind that reason in _Reynolds_ v. _Sims,_
377 U. S. 533 (1964), which found unconstitutional bicameral state
legislatures of a sort that had existed since the beginning of the Republic.
And almost monthly, it seems, the Court has not shrunk from invalidating
aspects of criminal procedure and penology of similar vintage. See, _e. g.,_
_Deck_ v. _Missouri,_ 544 U. S. 622, 633 (2005) (invalidating practice of
shackling defendants absent "special circumstances"); _id.,_ at 641-645
(Thomas, J., dissenting); _Roper_ v. _Simmons,_ 543 U. S. 551, 568 (2005)
(invalidating practice of executing under-18-year-old offenders); _id.,_ at
611, n. 2 (Scalia, J., dissenting). What, then, could be the genuine "good
reason" for occasionally ignoring the neutrality principle? I suggest it is
the instinct for self-preservation, and the recognition that the Court, which
"has no influence over either the sword or the purse," The Federalist No. 78,
p. 412 (J. Pole ed. 2005) (A. Hamilton), cannot go *893 too far down the road
of an enforced neutrality that contradicts both historical fact and current
practice without losing all that sustains it: the willingness of the people to
accept its interpretation of the Constitution as definitive, in preference to
the contrary interpretation of the democratically elected branches.

Besides appealing to the demonstrably false principle that the government
cannot favor religion over irreligion, today's opinion suggests that the
posting of the Ten Commandments violates the principle that the government
cannot favor one religion over another. See _ante,_ at 868; see also _Van
Orden, ante,_ at 717-718 (Stevens, J., dissenting). That is indeed a valid
principle where public aid or assistance to religion is concerned, see
_Zelman_ v. _Simmons-Harris,_ 536 U. S. 639, 652 (2002), or where the free
exercise of religion is at issue, _Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc._ v.
_Hialeah,_ 508 U. S. 520, 532-533 (1993); _id.,_ at 557-558 (Scalia, J.,
concurring in part and concurring in judgment), but it necessarily applies in
a more limited sense to public acknowledgment of the Creator. If religion in
the public forum had to be entirely nondenominational, there could be no
religion in the public forum at all. One cannot say the word "God," or "the
Almighty," one cannot offer public supplication or thanksgiving, without
contradicting the beliefs of some people that there are many gods, or that God
or the gods pay no attention to human affairs. With respect to public
acknowledgment of religious belief, it is entirely clear from our Nation's
historical practices that the Establishment Clause permits this disregard of
polytheists and believers in unconcerned deities, just as it permits the
disregard of devout atheists. The Thanksgiving Proclamation issued by George
Washington at the instance of the First Congress was scrupulously
nondenominationalbut it was monotheistic.[3] In _Marsh_ v. *894 _Chambers,
supra_ _,_ we said that the fact the particular prayers offered in the
Nebraska Legislature were "in the Judeo-Christian tradition," _id.,_ at 793,
posed no additional problem, because "there is no indication that the prayer
opportunity has been exploited to proselytize or advance any one, or to
disparage any other, faith or belief," _id.,_ at 794-795.

Historical practices thus demonstrate that there is a distance between the
acknowledgment of a single Creator and the establishment of a religion. The
former is, as _Marsh_ v. _Chambers_ put it, "a tolerable acknowledgment of
beliefs widely held among the people of this country." _Id.,_ at 792. The
three most popular religions in the United States, Christianity, Judaism, and
Islamwhich combined account for 97.7% of all believersare monotheistic. See
U. S. Dept. of Commerce, Bureau of Census, Statistical Abstract of the United
States: 2004-2005, p. 55 (124th ed. 2004) (Table No. 67). All of them,
moreover (Islam included), believe that the Ten Commandments were given by God
to Moses, and are divine prescriptions for a virtuous life. See 13
Encyclopedia of Religion 9074 (2d ed. 2005); The Qur'an 104 (M. Haleem transl.
2004). Publicly honoring the Ten Commandments is thus indistinguishable,
insofar as discriminating against other religions is concerned, from publicly
honoring God. Both practices are recognized across such a broad and diverse
range of the populationfrom Christians to Muslimsthat they cannot be
reasonably understood as a government endorsement of a particular religious
viewpoint.[4]

##  *895 B

A few remarks are necessary in response to the criticism of this dissent by
the Court, as well as JUSTICE STEVENS' criticism in the related case of _Van
Orden_ v. _Perry, ante,_ p. 707. JUSTICE STEVENS' writing is largely devoted
to an attack upon a straw man. "[R]eliance on early religious proclamations
and statements made by the Founders is ... problematic," he says, "because
those views were not espoused at the Constitutional Convention in 1787 nor
enshrined in the Constitution's text." _Van Orden, ante,_ at 724 (dissenting
opinion) (footnote omitted). But I have not relied upon (as he and the Court
in this case do) mere "proclamations and statements" of the Founders. I have
relied primarily upon official acts and official proclamations of the United
States or of the component branches of its Government, including the First
Congress's beginning of the tradition of legislative prayer to God, its
appointment of congressional chaplains, its legislative proposal of a
Thanksgiving Proclamation, and its reenactment of the Northwest Territory
Ordinance; our first President's issuance of a Thanksgiving Proclamation; and
invocation of God at the opening of sessions of the Supreme Court. The only
mere "proclamations and statements" of the Founders I have relied upon were
statements of Founders who occupied federal office, and spoke in at least a
quasi-official capacityWashington's prayer at the opening of his Presidency
and his Farewell Address, President John Adams' letter to the Massachusetts
Militia, and Jefferson's and Madison's inaugural addresses. The Court and
JUSTICE STEVENS, by contrast, appeal to no official or even quasi-official
action in support of their view of the Establishment Clauseonly James
Madison's Memorial and Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, written
before the Federal Constitution had even been proposed, *896 two letters
written by Madison long after he was President, and the quasi-official
_inaction_ of Thomas Jefferson in refusing to issue a Thanksgiving
Proclamation. See _ante,_ at 878-879; _Van Orden, ante,_ at 724-725 (Stevens,
J., dissenting). The Madison Memorial and Remonstrance, dealing as it does
with enforced contribution to religion rather than public acknowledgment of
God, is irrelevant; one of the letters is utterly ambiguous as to the point at
issue here, and should not be read to contradict Madison's statements in his
first inaugural address, quoted earlier; even the other letter does not
disapprove public acknowledgment of God, unless one posits (what Madison's own
actions as President would contradict) that reference to God contradicts "the
equality of _all_ religious sects." See Letter from James Madison to Edward
Livingston (July 10, 1822), in 5 The Founders' Constitution 105-106 (P.
Kurland & R. Lerner eds. 1987). And as to Jefferson: The notoriously self-
contradicting Jefferson did not choose to have his nonauthorship of a
Thanksgiving Proclamation inscribed on his tombstone. What he did have
inscribed was his authorship of the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, a
governmental act which begins "Whereas, Almighty God hath created the mind
free. . . ." Va. Code Ann. § 57-1 (Lexis 2003).

It is no answer for JUSTICE STEVENS to say that the understanding that these
official and quasi-official actions reflect was not "enshrined in the
Constitution's text." _Van Orden, ante,_ at 724 (dissenting opinion). The
Establishment Clause, upon which JUSTICE STEVENS would rely, _was_ enshrined
in the Constitution's text, and these official actions show _what it meant._
There were doubtless some who thought it should have a broader meaning, but
those views were plainly rejected. JUSTICE STEVENS says that reliance on these
actions is "bound to paint a misleading picture," _ibid.,_ but it is hard to
see why. What is more probative of the meaning of the Establishment Clause
than the actions of *897 the very Congress that proposed it, and of the first
President charged with observing it?

JUSTICE STEVENS also appeals to the undoubted fact that some in the founding
generation thought that the Religion Clauses of the First Amendment should
have a _narrower_ meaning, protecting only the Christian religion or perhaps
only Protestantism. See _Van Orden, ante,_ at 725-728. I am at a loss to see
how this helps his case, except by providing a cloud of obfuscating smoke.
(Since most thought the Clause permitted government invocation of monotheism,
and some others thought it permitted government invocation of Christianity, he
proposes that it be construed not to permit any government invocation of
religion at all.) At any rate, those narrower views of the Establishment
Clause were as clearly rejected as the more expansive ones. Washington's First
Thanksgiving Proclamation is merely an example. _All_ of the actions of
Washington and the First Congress upon which I have relied, virtually all
Thanksgiving Proclamations throughout our history,[5] and _all_ the other
examples of our Government's favoring religion that I have cited, have invoked
God, but not Jesus Christ.[6] Rather than relying *898 upon JUSTICE STEVENS'
assurance that "[t]he original understanding of the type of `religion' that
qualified for constitutional protection under the Establishment Clause likely
did not include ... followers of Judaism and Islam," _Van Orden, ante,_ at
728; see also _ante,_ at 880, I would prefer to take the word of George
Washington, who, in his famous Letter to the Hebrew Congregation of Newport,
Rhode Island, wrote:

> "All possess alike liberty of conscience and immunities of citizenship. It
> is now no more that toleration is spoken of, as if it was by the indulgence
> of one class of people, that another enjoyed the exercise of their inherent
> natural rights." 6 The Papers of George Washington, Presidential Series 285
> (D. Twohig ed. 1996).

The letter concluded, by the way, with an invocation of the one God:

> "May the father of all mercies scatter light and not darkness in our paths,
> and make us all in our several vocations useful here, and in his own due
> time and way everlastingly happy." _Ibid._

JUSTICE STEVENS says that if one is serious about following the original
understanding of the Establishment Clause, he must repudiate its incorporation
into the Fourteenth Amendment, and hold that it does not apply against the
States. See _Van Orden, ante,_ at 729-731 (dissenting opinion). This is more
smoke. JUSTICE STEVENS did not feel that way last Term, when he joined an
opinion insisting upon the original meaning of the Confrontation Clause, but
nonetheless applying it against the State of Washington. See _Crawford_ v.
_Washington,_ 541 U. S. 36 (2004). The notion that incorporation empties the
incorporated provisions of their original meaning has no support in either
reason or precedent.

*899 JUSTICE STEVENS argues that original meaning should not be the touchstone anyway, but that we should rather "expoun[d] the meaning of constitutional provisions with one eye toward our Nation's history and the other fixed on its democratic aspirations." _Van Orden, ante,_ at 732 (dissenting opinion). This is not the place to debate the merits of the "living Constitution," though I must observe that Justice Stevens' quotation from _McCulloch_ v. _Maryland,_ 4 Wheat. 316, 407 (1819), refutes rather than supports that approach.[7] Even assuming, however, that the meaning of the Constitution ought to change according to "democratic aspirations," why are those aspirations to be found in Justices' notions of what the Establishment Clause ought to mean, rather than in the democratically adopted dispositions of our current society? As I have observed above, numerous provisions of our laws and numerous continuing practices of our people demonstrate that the government's invocation of God (and hence the government's invocation of the Ten Commandments) is unobjectionableincluding a statute enacted by Congress almost unanimously less than three years ago, stating that "under God" in the Pledge of Allegiance is constitutional, see 116 Stat. 2058. To ignore all this is not to give effect to "democratic aspirations" but to frustrate them.

Finally, I must respond to JUSTICE STEVENS' assertion that I would
"marginaliz[e] the belief systems of more than 7 million Americans" who adhere
to religions that are not monotheistic. _Van Orden, ante,_ at 719, n. 18
(dissenting opinion). Surely that is a gross exaggeration. The beliefs of
those citizens are entirely protected by the Free Exercise Clause, and by
those aspects of the Establishment Clause that do not relate to government
acknowledgment of the Creator. Invocation of God despite their beliefs is
permitted not because nonmonotheistic religions cease to be religions
recognized by the Religion Clauses of the First *900 Amendment, but because
governmental invocation of God is not an establishment. JUSTICE STEVENS fails
to recognize that in the context of public acknowledgments of God there are
legitimate _competing_ interests: On the one hand, the interest of that
minority in not feeling "excluded"; but on the other, the interest of the
overwhelming majority of religious believers in being able to give God thanks
and supplication _as a people,_ and with respect to our national endeavors.
Our national tradition has resolved that conflict in favor of the majority.[8]
It is not for this Court to change a disposition that accounts, many Americans
think, for the phenomenon remarked upon in a quotation attributed to various
authors, including Bismarck, but which I prefer to associate with Charles de
Gaulle: "God watches over little children, drunkards, and the United States of
America."

## II

As bad as the _Lemon_ test is, it is worse for the fact that, since its
inception, its seemingly simple mandates have been manipulated to fit whatever
result the Court aimed to achieve. Today's opinion is no different. In two
respects it modifies _Lemon_ to ratchet up the Court's hostility to religion.
First, the Court justifies inquiry into legislative purpose, not as an end
itself, but as a means to ascertain the appearance of the government action to
an "`objective observer.'" _Ante,_ at 862. Because in the Court's view the
true danger to be guarded against is that the objective observer would feel
like an "`outside[r]'" or "`not [a] full membe[r] of the political
community,'" its inquiry focuses not on *901 the _actual purpose_ of
government action, but the "purpose apparent from government action." _Ante,_
at 860. Under this approach, even if a government could show that its actual
purpose was not to advance religion, it would presumably violate the
Constitution as long as the Court's objective observer would think otherwise.
See _Capitol Square Review and Advisory Bd._ v. _Pinette,_ 515 U. S. 753,
776-777 (1995) (O'CONNOR, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment)
(stating that "when the reasonable observer would view a government practice
as endorsing religion, . . . it is our _duty_ to hold the practice invalid,"
even if the law at issue was neutral and the benefit conferred on the
religious entity was incidental).

I have remarked before that it is an odd jurisprudence that bases the
unconstitutionality of a government practice that does not _actually_ advance
religion on the hopes of the government that it _would_ do so. See _Edwards,_
482 U. S., at 639. But that oddity pales in comparison to the one invited by
today's analysis: the legitimacy of a government action with a wholly secular
effect would turn on the _misperception_ of an imaginary observer that the
government officials behind the action had the intent to advance religion.

Second, the Court replaces _Lemon_ 's requirement that the government have "
_a_ secular . . . purpose," 403 U. S., at 612 (emphasis added), with the
heightened requirement that the secular purpose "predominate" over any purpose
to advance religion. _Ante,_ at 864-865. The Court treats this extension as a
natural outgrowth of the longstanding requirement that the government's
secular purpose not be a sham, but simple logic shows the two to be unrelated.
If the government's proffered secular purpose is not genuine, then the
government has no secular purpose at all. The new demand that secular purpose
predominate contradicts _Lemon_ 's more limited requirement, and finds no
support in our cases. In all but one of the five cases in which this Court has
invalidated a government practice on the basis of its purpose to *902 benefit
religion, it has first declared that the statute was motivated entirely by the
desire to advance religion. See _Santa Fe Independent School Dist._ v. _Doe,_
530 U. S. 290, 308-309 (2000) (dismissing the school district's proffered
secular purposes as shams); _Wallace,_ 472 U. S., at 56 (finding " _no_
secular purpose" (emphasis in original)); _Stone_ v. _Graham,_ 449 U. S. 39,
41 (1980) _(per curiam)_ (finding that "Kentucky's statute requiring the
posting of the Ten Commandments in public school rooms has _no secular
legislative purpose_ " (emphasis added)); _Epperson_ v. _Arkansas,_ 393 U. S.
97, 107-109 (1968). In _Edwards, supra,_ the Court did say that the state
action was invalid because its "primary" or "preeminent" purpose was to
advance a particular religious belief, 482 U. S., at 590, 593, 594, but that
statement was unnecessary to the result, since the Court rejected the State's
only proffered secular purpose as a sham. See _id.,_ at 589.

I have urged that _Lemon_ 's purpose prong be abandoned, because (as I have
discussed in Part I) even an _exclusive_ purpose to foster or assist religious
practice is not necessarily invalidating. But today's extension makes things
even worse. By shifting the focus of _Lemon_ 's purpose prong from the search
for a genuine, secular motivation to the hunt for a predominantly religious
purpose, the Court converts what has in the past been a fairly limited inquiry
into a rigorous review of the full record.[9] Those responsible for the *903
adoption of the Religion Clauses would surely regard it as a bitter irony that
the religious values they designed those Clauses to _protect_ have now become
so distasteful to this Court that if they constitute anything more than a
subordinate motive for government action they will invalidate it.

## III

Even accepting the Court's _Lemon_ -based premises, the displays at issue here
were constitutional.

## A

To any person who happened to walk down the hallway of the McCreary or Pulaski
County Courthouse during the roughly nine months when the Foundations Displays
were exhibited, the displays must have seemed unremarkableif indeed they were
noticed at all. The walls of both court-houses were already lined with
historical documents and other assorted portraits; each Foundations Display
was exhibited in the same format as these other displays and nothing in the
record suggests that either County took steps to give it greater prominence.

Entitled "The Foundations of American Law and Government Display," each
display consisted of nine equally sized documents: the original version of the
Magna Carta, the Declaration of Independence, the Bill of Rights, the Star
Spangled Banner, the Mayflower Compact of 1620, a picture of Lady Justice, the
National Motto of the United States ("In God We Trust"), the Preamble to the
Kentucky Constitution, and the Ten Commandments. The displays did not
emphasize any of the nine documents in any way: The frame holding the Ten
Commandments was of the same size and had the *904 same appearance as that
which held each of the other documents. See 354 F. 3d 438, 443 (CA6 2003).

Posted with the documents was a plaque, identifying the display, and
explaining that it "`contains documents that played a significant role in the
foundation of our system of law and government.'" _Ibid._ The explanation
related to the Ten Commandments was third in the list of nine and did not
serve to distinguish it from the other documents. It stated:

> "`The Ten Commandments have profoundly influenced the formation of Western
> legal thought and the formation of our country. That influence is clearly
> seen in the Declaration of Independence, which declared that, "We hold these
> truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are
> endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these
> are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness." The Ten Commandments
> provide the moral background of the Declaration of Independence and the
> foundation of our legal tradition.'" _Ibid._

## B

On its face, the Foundations Displays manifested the purely secular purpose
that the Counties asserted before the District Court: "to display documents
that played a significant role in the foundation of our system of law and
government." Affidavit of Judge Jimmie Green in Support of Defendants'
Opposition to Plaintiffs' Motion for Contempt or, in the Alternative, for
Supplemental Preliminary Injunction in Civ. Action No. 99-507 (ED Ky.), p. 2,
¶ 4, App. 57. That the displays included the Ten Commandments did not
transform their apparent secular purpose into one of impermissible advocacy
for Judeo-Christian beliefs. Even an isolated display of the Decalogue
conveys, at worst, "an equivocal message, perhaps of respect for Judaism, for
religion in general, or for law." _Allegheny County,_ 492 U. S., at 652
(STEVENS, J., *905 concurring in part and dissenting in part). But when the
Ten Commandments appear alongside other documents of secular significance in a
display devoted to the foundations of American law and government, the context
communicates that the Ten Commandments are included, not to teach their
binding nature as a religious text, but to show their unique contribution to
the development of the legal system. See _id.,_ at 652-653. This is doubly
true when the display is introduced by a document that informs passersby that
it "`contains documents that played a significant role in the foundation of
our system of law and government.'" 354 F. 3d, at 443.

The same result follows if the Ten Commandments display is viewed in light of
the government practices that this Court has countenanced in the past. The
acknowledgment of the contribution that religion in general, and the Ten
Commandments in particular, have made to our Nation's legal and governmental
heritage is surely no more of a step toward establishment of religion than was
the practice of legislative prayer we approved in _Marsh_ v. _Chambers,_ 463
U. S. 783 (1983), and it seems to be on par with the inclusion of a crèche or
a menorah in a "Holiday" display that incorporates other secular symbols, see
_Lynch_ v. _Donnelly,_ 465 U. S., at 679-680; _Allegheny County, supra,_ at
621 (Blackmun, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). The parallels
between this case and _Marsh_ and _Lynch_ are sufficiently compelling that
they ought to decide this case, even under the Court's misguided Establishment
Clause jurisprudence.[10]

*906 Acknowledgment of the contribution that religion has made to our Nation's legal and governmental heritage partakes of a centuries-old tradition. Members of this Court have themselves often detailed the degree to which religious belief pervaded the National Government during the founding era. See _Lynch, supra,_ at 674-678; _Marsh, supra,_ at 786-788; _Lee_ v. _Weisman,_ 505 U. S. 577, 633-636 (1992) (SCALIA, J., dissenting); _Wallace,_ 472 U. S., at 100-106 (REHNQUIST, J., dissenting); _Engel_ v. _Vitale,_ 370 U. S. 421, 446-450, and n. 3 (1962) (Stewart, J., dissenting). Display of the Ten Commandments is well within the mainstream of this practice of acknowledgment. Federal, state, and local governments across the Nation have engaged in such display.[11] The Supreme Court Building itself includes depictions of Moses with the Ten Commandments in the Courtroom and on the east pediment of the building, and symbols of the Ten Commandments "adorn the metal gates lining the north and south sides of the Courtroom as well as the doors leading into the Courtroom." _Van Orden, ante,_ at 688 (plurality opinion). Similar depictions of the Decalogue appear *907 on public buildings and monuments throughout our Nation's Capital. _Ante,_ at 689. The frequency of these displays testifies to the popular understanding that the Ten Commandments are a foundation of the rule of law, and a symbol of the role that religion played, and continues to play, in our system of government.

Perhaps in recognition of the centrality of the Ten Commandments as a widely
recognized symbol of religion in public life, the Court is at pains to dispel
the impression that its decision will require governments across the country
to sandblast the Ten Commandments from the public square. See _ante,_ at 874.
The constitutional problem, the Court says, is with the Counties' _purpose_ in
erecting the Foundations Displays, not the displays themselves. The Court adds
in a footnote: "One consequence of taking account of the purpose underlying
past actions is that the same government action may be constitutional if taken
in the first instance and unconstitutional if it has a sectarian heritage."
_Ante,_ at 866, n. 14.

This inconsistency may be explicable in theory, but I suspect that the
"objective observer" with whom the Court is so concerned will recognize its
absurdity in practice. By virtue of details familiar only to the parties to
litigation and their lawyers, McCreary and Pulaski Counties, Kentucky, and
Rutherford County, Tennessee, have been ordered to remove the same display
that appears in courthouses from Mercer County, Kentucky, to Elkhart County,
Indiana. Compare _American Civil Liberties Union of Tenn._ v. _Rutherford
County,_ 209 F. Supp. 2d 799, 808-809 (MD Tenn. 2002) (holding Foundations
Display to be unconstitutional based on prior actions of county commission),
with _Books_ v. _Elkhart County,_ 401 F. 3d 857, 869 (CA7 2005) (sustaining
Foundations Display as "secular . . . in its purpose and effect"); _American
Civil Liberties Union of Ky._ v. _Mercer County,_ 219 F. Supp. 2d 777, 787-789
(ED Ky. 2002) (rejecting Establishment Clause challenge to an identical
Foundations Display and distinguishing _McCreary County_ on the ground *908
that the County's purpose had not been "tainted with any prior history").
Displays erected in silence (and under the direction of good legal advice) are
permissible, while those hung after discussion and debate are deemed
unconstitutional. Reduction of the Establishment Clause to such minutiae
trivializes the Clause's protection against religious establishment; indeed,
it may inflame religious passions by making the passing comments of every
government official the subject of endless litigation.

## C

In any event, the Court's conclusion that the Counties exhibited the
Foundations Displays with the purpose of promoting religion is doubtful. In
the Court's view, the impermissible motive was apparent from the initial
displays of the Ten Commandments all by themselves: When that occurs, the
Court says, "a religious object is unmistakable." _Ante,_ at 869. Surely that
cannot be. If, as discussed above, the Commandments have a proper place in our
civic history, even placing them by themselves can be civically
motivatedespecially when they are placed, not in a school (as they were in
the _Stone_ case upon which the Court places such reliance), but in a
courthouse. Cf. _Van Orden, ante,_ at 701 (BREYER, J., concurring in judgment)
("The circumstances surrounding the display's placement on the capitol grounds
and its physical setting suggest that the State itself intended the . . .
nonreligious aspects of the tablets' message to predominate"). And the fact
that at the posting of the exhibit a clergyman was present is unremarkable
(clergymen taking particular pride in the role of the Ten Commandments in our
civic history); and even more unremarkable the fact that the clergyman
"testified to the certainty of the existence of God," _ante,_ at 869.

The Court has in the past prohibited government actions that "proselytize or
advance any one, or . . . disparage any other, faith or belief," _Marsh,_ 463
U. S., at 794-795, or that apply some level of coercion (though I and others
have disagreed *909 about the form that coercion must take), see, _e. g.,_
_Lee_ v. _Weisman,_ 505 U. S., at 592 (prayer at high-school graduation
invalid because of "subtle coercive pressure"); _id.,_ at 642 (SCALIA, J.,
dissenting). The passive display of the Ten Commandments, even standing alone,
does not begin to do either. What JUSTICE KENNEDY said of the crèche in
_Allegheny County_ is equally true of the Counties' original Ten Commandments
displays:

> "No one was compelled to observe or participate in any religious ceremony or
> activity. [T]he count[ies] [did not] contribut[e] significant amounts of tax
> money to serve the cause of one religious faith. [The Ten Commandments] are
> purely passive symbols of [the religious foundation for many of our laws and
> governmental institutions]. Passersby who disagree with the message conveyed
> by th[e] displays are free to ignore them, or even to turn their backs, just
> as they are free to do when they disagree with any other form of government
> speech." 492 U. S., at 664 (opinion concurring in judgment in part and
> dissenting in part).

Nor is it the case that a solo display of the Ten Commandments advances any
one faith. They are assuredly a religious symbol, but they are not so closely
associated with a single religious belief that their display can reasonably be
understood as preferring one religious sect over another. The Ten Commandments
are recognized by Judaism, Christianity, and Islam alike as divinely given.
See 13 Encyclopedia of Religion 9074 (2d ed. 2005).[12]

*910 The Court also points to the Counties' second displays, which featured a number of statements in historical documents reflecting a religious influence, and the resolutions that accompanied their erection, as evidence of an impermissible religious purpose.[13] In the Court's view, "[t]he [second] display's unstinting focus . . . on religious passages, show[s] that the Counties were posting the Commandments precisely because of their sectarian content." _Ante,_ at 870. No, all it necessarily shows is that the exhibit was meant to focus upon the historic role of religious belief in our national life which is entirely permissible. And the same can be said of the resolution. To forbid any government focus upon this aspect of our history is to display what Justice Goldberg called "untutored devotion to the concept of neutrality," _Abington Township,_ 374 U. S., at 306 (concurring opinion), that would commit the Court (and the Nation) to a revisionist agenda of secularization.

*911 Turning at last to the displays actually at issue in this case, the Court faults the Counties for not _repealing_ the resolution expressing what the Court believes to be an impermissible intent. Under these circumstances, the Court says, "[n]o reasonable observer could swallow the claim that the Counties had cast off the objective so unmistakable in the earlier displays." _Ante,_ at 872. Even were I to accept all that the Court has said before, I would not agree with that assessment. To begin with, of course, it is unlikely that a reasonable observer _would even have been aware_ of the resolutions, so there would be nothing to "cast off." The Court implies that the Counties may have been able to remedy the "taint" from the old resolutions by enacting a new one. See _ante,_ at 871-872. But that action would have been wholly unnecessary in light of the explanation that the Counties included _with the displays themselves:_ A plaque next to the documents informed all who passed by that each display "contains documents that played a significant role in the foundation of our system of law and government." Additionally, there was no reason for the Counties to repeal or repudiate the resolutions adopted with the hanging of the second displays, since they related _only to the second displays._ After complying with the District Court's order to remove the second displays "immediately," and erecting new displays that in content and by express assertion reflected a _different_ purpose from that identified in the resolutions, the Counties had no reason to believe that their previous resolutions would be deemed to be the basis for their actions.[14] After the Counties *912 discovered that the sentiments expressed in the resolutions could be attributed to their most recent displays (in oral argument before this Court), they repudiated them immediately.

In sum: The first displays did not necessarily evidence an intent to further
religious practice; nor did the second displays, or the resolutions
authorizing them; and there is in any event no basis for attributing whatever
intent motivated the first and second displays to the third. Given the
presumption of regularity that always accompanies our review of official
action, see n. 9, _supra,_ the Court has identified no evidence of a purpose
to advance religion in a way that is inconsistent with our cases. The Court
may well be correct in identifying the third displays as the fruit of a desire
to display the Ten Commandments, _ante,_ at 872, but neither our cases nor our
history support its assertion that such a desire renders the fruit poisonous.

## * * *

For the foregoing reasons, I would reverse the judgment of the Court of
Appeals.

## NOTES

[*] Briefs of _amici curiae_ urging reversal were filed for the State of
Alabama et al. by _Troy King,_ Attorney General of Alabama, _Kevin C. Newsom,_
Solicitor General, and _Charles B. Campbell,_ Assistant Attorney General, and
by the Attorneys General for their respective States as follows: _Charles J.
Crist, Jr.,_ of Florida, _Lawrence G. Wasden_ of Idaho, _Steve Carter_ of
Indiana, _Phill Kline_ of Kansas, _Gregory D. Stumbo_ of Kentucky, _Charles C.
Foti, Jr.,_ of Louisiana, _Jim Hood_ of Mississippi, _Jim Petro_ of Ohio,
_Gerald J. Pappert_ of Pennsylvania, _Henry McMaster_ of South Carolina, _Greg
Abbott_ of Texas, _Mark L. Shurtleff_ of Utah, _Jerry W. Kilgore_ of Virginia,
and _Patrick J. Crank_ of Wyoming; for the State of Minnesota et al. by _Mike
Hatch,_ Attorney General of Minnesota, and _John S. Garry,_ Assistant Attorney
General, and by the Attorneys General for their respective States as follows:
_Lisa Madigan_ of Illinois, _Thomas J. Miller_ of Iowa, _Jeremiah W. (Jay)
Nixon_ of Missouri, _Patricia A. Madrid_ of New Mexico, _W. A. Drew Edmondson_
of Oklahoma, and _Peggy A. Lautenschlager_ of Wisconsin; for the American
Center for Law and Justice by _Jay Alan Sekulow, Stuart J. Roth, Francis J.
Manion,_ and _Walter M. Weber;_ for the American Legion by _Kelly Shackelford_
and _Philip B. Onderdonk, Jr.;_ for the American Liberties Institute et al. by
_Frederick H. Nelson;_ for the Ashbrook Center for Public Affairs et al. by
_Steven C. Seeger;_ for the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty by _Anthony R.
Picarello, Jr.;_ for the Conservative Legal Defense and Education Fund et al.
by _Herbert W. Titus_ and _William J. Olson;_ for the Eagle Forum Education &
Legal Defense Fund by _Douglas G. Smith_ and _Phyllis Schlafly;_ for Faith and
Action et al. by _Bernard P. Reese, Jr.;_ for the Family Research Council,
Inc., et al. by _Robert P. George;_ for the Foundation for Moral Law, Inc., by
_Benjamin D. DuPré_ and _Gregory M. Jones;_ for Judicial Watch, Inc., by _Paul
J. Orfanedes_ and _Meredith L. Cavallo;_ for the Pacific Justice Institute by
_Peter D. Lepiscopo;_ for the Rutherford Institute by _John W._ _Whitehead;_
for the Thomas More Law Center by _Edward L. White III;_ and for Wallbuilders,
Inc., by _Barry C. Hodge._

Briefs of _amici curiae_ urging affirmance were filed for American Atheists by
_Robert J. Bruno;_ for the American Humanist Association et al. by _Elizabeth
L. Hileman;_ for Americans United for Separation of Church and State et al. by
_William M. Hohengarten, Ian Heath Gershengorn, Ayesha Khan, Richard B.
Katskee,_ and _Judith E. Schaeffer;_ for the Anti-Defamation League et al. by
_Jeffrey R. Babbin, Aaron S. Bayer, Kenneth D. Heath, Frederick M. Lawrence,
Daniel S. Alter,_ and _Steven M. Freeman;_ for the Atheist Law Center et al.
by _Pamela L. Sumners_ and _Larry Darby;_ for the Baptist Joint Committee et
al. by _Douglas Laycock, Jeffrey P. Sinensky, K. Hollyn Hollman,_ and _Marc D.
Stern;_ for the Council for Secular Humanism et al. by _Ronald A. Lindsay;_
for the Freedom from Religion Foundation by _James A. Friedman_ and _James D.
Peterson;_ and for Legal Historians and Law Scholars by _Steven K. Green._

_Julie Underwood_ filed a brief of _amici curiae_ for the National School
Boards Association et al.

[1] We do not consider here a display of the Ten Commandments in school-rooms
in Harlan County, Kentucky, that was litigated in consolidated proceedings in
the District Court and Court of Appeals. That display is the subject of a
separate petition to this Court.

[2] This text comes from a record exhibit showing the Pulaski County
Commandments that were part of the County's first and second displays. The
District Court found that the displays in each County were functionally
identical. 96 F. Supp. 2d 679, 682, n. 2 (ED Ky. 2000); 96 F. Supp. 2d 691,
693, n. 2 (ED Ky. 2000).

[3] The First Amendment provides that "Congress shall make no law respecting
an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof . . .
." This prohibition of establishment applies to "the States and their
political subdivisions" through the Fourteenth Amendment. _Santa Fe
Independent School Dist._ v. _Doe,_ 530 U. S. 290, 301 (2000).

[4] The District Court noted that there was some confusion as to whether the
Ten Commandments hung independently in the second display, or were
incorporated into the copy of the page from the Congressional Record declaring
1983 "the Year of the Bible." 96 F. Supp. 2d, at 684, and n. 4; 96 F. Supp.
2d, at 695-696, and n. 4. The exhibits in the record depict the Commandments
hanging as a separate item, Def. Exh. 9, and that is more consistent with the
Counties' description of the second display in this Court. "[After erecting
the first display] Petitioners posted additional donated documents.... This
display consisted of the Ten Commandments along with other historical
documents." Brief for Petitioners 2. Like the District Court, we find our
analysis applies equally to either format.

[5] The court also found that the display had the effect of endorsing
religion: "Removed from their historical context and placed with other
documents with which the only common link is religion, the documents have the
undeniable effect of endorsing religion." 96 F. Supp. 2d, at 688; 96 F. Supp.
2d, at 699-700.

[6] Before the District Court issued the modified injunction, the Counties
removed the label of "King James Version" and the citation to Exodus. 145 F.
Supp. 2d 845, 847 (ED Ky. 2001).

[7] The court also found that the effect of the third display was to endorse
religion because the "reasonable observer will see one religious code placed
alongside eight political or patriotic documents, and will understand that the
counties promote that one religious code as being on a par with our nation's
most cherished secular symbols and documents" and because the "reasonable
observer [would know] something of the controversy surrounding these displays,
which has focused on only one of the nine framed documents: the Ten
Commandments." _Id.,_ at 851, 852.

[8] The Sixth Circuit did not decide whether the display had the impermissible
effect of advancing religion because one judge, having found the display
motivated by a religious purpose, did not reach that issue. 354 F. 3d, at 462
(Gibbons, J., concurring). The other judge in the majority concluded that a
reasonable observer would find that the display had the effect of endorsing
religion given the lack of analytical connection between the Commandments and
the other documents in the display, the court-house location of the display,
and the history of the displays. _Id.,_ at 458-459. The dissent found no
effect of endorsement because it concluded that a reasonable observer would
only see that the County had merely acknowledged the foundational role of the
Ten Commandments rather than endorsed their religious content. _Id.,_ at
479-480.

[9] _Stone_ v. _Graham,_ 449 U. S. 39, 41 (1980) _(per curiam)_ _;_ _Wallace_
v. _Jaffree,_ 472 U. S. 38, 56-61 (1985); _Edwards_ v. _Aguillard,_ 482 U. S.
578, 586-593 (1987); _Santa Fe,_ 530 U. S., at 308-309.

[10] At least since _Everson_ v. _Board of Ed. of Ewing,_ 330 U. S. 1 (1947),
it has been clear that Establishment Clause doctrine lacks the comfort of
categorical absolutes. In special instances we have found good reason to hold
governmental action legitimate even where its manifest purpose was presumably
religious. See, _e. g.,_ _Marsh_ v. _Chambers,_ 463 U. S. 783 (1983)
(upholding legislative prayer despite its religious nature). No such reasons
present themselves here.

[11] Moreover, JUSTICE O'CONNOR provided the fifth vote for the _Lynch_
majority and her concurrence emphasized the point made implicitly in the
majority opinion that a secular purpose must be serious to be sufficient. 465
U. S., at 691 (The purpose inquiry "is not satisfied ... by the mere existence
of some secular purpose, however dominated by religious purposes").

[12] _Stone_ found the sacred character of the Ten Commandments preeminent
despite an avowed secular purpose to show their "adoption as the fundamental
legal code of Western Civilization and the Common Law ...." 449 U. S., at
39-40, n. 1 (internal quotation marks omitted). And the _Abington_ Court was
unconvinced that music education or the teaching of literature were actual
secular objects behind laws requiring public school teachers to lead
recitations from the Lord's Prayer and readings from the Bible. 374 U. S., at
273.

[13] The dissent nonetheless maintains that the purpose test is satisfied so
long as any secular purpose for the government action is apparent. _Post,_ at
901-902 (opinion of SCALIA, J.). Leaving aside the fact that this position is
inconsistent with the language of the cases just discussed, it would leave the
purpose test with no real bite, given the ease of finding some secular purpose
for almost any government action. While heightened deference to legislatures
is appropriate for the review of economic legislation, an approach that
credits any valid purpose, no matter how trivial, has not been the way the
Court has approached government action that implicates establishment.

[14] One consequence of taking account of the purpose underlying past actions
is that the same government action may be constitutional if taken in the first
instance and unconstitutional if it has a sectarian heritage. This presents no
incongruity, however, because purpose matters. Just as Holmes's dog could tell
the difference between being kicked and being stumbled over, it will matter to
objective observers whether posting the Commandments follows on the heels of
displays motivated by sectarianism, or whether it lacks a history
demonstrating that purpose. The dissent, apparently not giving the reasonable
observer as much credit as Holmes's dog, contends that in practice it will be
"absur[d]" to rely upon differences in purpose in assessing government action.
_Post,_ at 907. As an initial matter, it will be the rare case in which one of
two identical displays violates the purpose prong. In general, like displays
tend to show like objectives and will be treated accordingly. But where one
display has a history manifesting sectarian purpose that the other lacks, it
is appropriate that they be treated differently, for the one display will be
properly understood as demonstrating a preference for one group of religious
believers as against another. See _supra,_ at 860-861. While posting the
Commandments may not have the effect of causing greater adherence to them, an
ostensible indication of a purpose to promote a particular faith certainly
will have the effect of causing viewers to understand the government is taking
sides.

[15] We note that the only factor in the preliminary injunction analysis that
is at issue here is the likelihood of the ACLU's success on the merits.

[16] Although the Counties point out that the courthouses contained other
displays besides the Ten Commandments, there is no suggestion that the
Commandments display was integrated to form a secular display.

[17] In _Stone,_ the Commandments were accompanied by a small disclaimer: "The
secular application of the Ten Commandments is clearly seen in its adoption as
the fundamental legal code of Western Civilization and the Common Law of the
United States." 449 U. S., at 39-40, n. 1 (internal quotation marks omitted).

[18] The Counties' other purposes were:

"to erect a display containing the Ten Commandments that is constitutional;...
to demonstrate that the Ten Commandments were part of the foundation of
American Law and Government; . . . [to include the Ten Commandments] as part
of the display for their significance in providing `the moral background of
the Declaration of Independence and the foundation of our legal tradition.'"
145 F. Supp. 2d, at 848 (some internal quotation marks omitted).

[19] Following argument in this case, in which the resolutions were discussed,
the McCreary and Pulaski County Boards did repeal the resolutions, acts of
obviously minimal significance in the evolution of the evidence.

[20] The Counties argue that the objective observer would not continue to
believe that the resolution was in effect after the third display went up
because the resolution authorized only the second display. But the resolution
on its face is not limited to any particular display. On the contrary, it
encourages the creation of a display with the Ten Commandments that also
includes such documents as "the National anthem . . . the National Motto . . .
the preamble to the Kentucky Constitution[,] the Declaration of Independence
[and] the Mayflower Compact . . . without censorship because of any Christian
or religious references." Def. Exh. 1, at 1. The third display contains all of
these documents, suggesting that it fell within the resolutions as well. The
record does not indicate whether the resolutions were posted with the third
display.

[21] The Counties have now backed away from their broad assertion that the
Commandments provide "the" moral background of the Declaration of
Independence, and now merely claim that many of the Commandments "regarding
murder, property, theft, coveting, marriage, rest from labor and honoring
parents are compatible with the rights to life, liberty and happiness." Brief
for Petitioners 10, n. 7.

[22] The Counties grasp at _McGowan_ v. _Maryland,_ 366 U. S. 420 (1961), but
it bears little resemblance to this case. As noted _supra,_ at 861, _McGowan_
held that religious purposes behind centuries-old predecessors of Maryland's
Sunday laws were not dispositive of the purposes of modern Sunday laws, where
the legislature had removed much of the religious reference in the laws and
stated secular and pragmatic justifications for them. 366 U. S., at 446-452.
But a conclusion that centuries-old purposes may no longer be operative says
nothing about the relevance of recent evidence of purpose, and this case is
far more like _Santa Fe,_ with its evolution of a school football game prayer
policy over the course of a single lawsuit. Like that case, "[t]his [one]
comes to us as the latest step in developing litigation brought as a challenge
to institutional practices that unquestionably violated the Establishment
Clause." 530 U. S., at 315 (describing the evolution of the school district's
football prayer policy). Thus, as in _Santa Fe,_ it makes sense to examine the
Counties' latest action "in light of [their] history of" unconstitutional
practices. _Id.,_ at 309.

[23] The dissent notes that another depiction of Moses and the Commandments
adorns this Court's east pediment. _Post,_ at 906. But as with the courtroom
frieze, Moses is found in the company of other figures, not only great but
secular.

[24] The dissent also maintains that our precedents show that a solo display
of the Commandments is a mere acknowledgment of religion "on par with the
inclusion of a crèche or a menorah" in a holiday display, or an official's
speech or prayer, _post,_ at 905. Whether or not our views would differ about
the significance of those practices if we were considering them as original
matters, they manifest no objective of subjecting individual lives to
religious influence comparable to the apparent and openly acknowledged purpose
behind posting the Commandments. Crèches placed with holiday symbols and
prayers by legislators do not insistently call for religious action on the
part of citizens; the history of posting the Commandments expressed a purpose
to urge citizens to act in prescribed ways as a personal response to divine
authority.

[25] The dissent cites material suggesting that separationists like Jefferson
and Madison were not absolutely consistent in abstaining from official
religious acknowledgment. _Post,_ at 888. But, a record of inconsistent
historical practice is too weak a lever to upset decades of precedent adhering
to the neutrality principle. And it is worth noting that Jefferson thought his
actions were consistent with nonendorsement of religion and Madison regretted
any backsliding he may have done. _Lee_ v. _Weisman,_ 505 U. S. 577, 622-625
(1992) (SOUTER, J., concurring). "Homer nodded." _Id.,_ at 624, n. 5
(corrected in erratum at 535 U. S. II).

[26] There might, indeed, even have been some reservations about monotheism as
the paradigm example. It is worth noting that the canonical biography of
George Washington, the dissent's primary exemplar of the monotheistic
tradition, calls him a deist. J. Flexner, George Washington: Anguish and
Farewell (1793-1799), p. 490 (1972) ("Washington's religious belief was that
of the enlightenment: deism"). It would have been odd for the First Congress
to propose an Amendment with Religion Clauses that took no account of the
President's religion. As with other historical matters pertinent here,
however, there are conflicting conclusions. R. Brookhiser, Founding Father:
Rediscovering George Washington 146 (1996) ("Washington's God was no
watchmaker"). History writ small does not give clear and certain answers to
questions about the limits of "religion" or "establishment."

[1] See, _e. g.,_ President's Thanksgiving Day 2004 Proclamation (Nov. 23,
2004), available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2004/11/
XXXXXXXX-X.html (all Internet materials as visited June 24, 2005, and
available in Clerk of Court's case file).

[2] The fountainhead of this jurisprudence, _Everson_ v. _Board of Ed. of
Ewing_ _,_ based its dictum that "[n]either a state nor the Federal Government
. . . can pass laws which . . . aid all religions," 330 U. S., at 15, on a
review of historical evidence that focused on the debate leading up to the
passage of the Virginia Bill for Religious Liberty, see _id.,_ at 11-13. A
prominent commentator of the time remarked (after a thorough review of the
evidence himself) that it appeared the Court had been "sold . . . a bill of
goods." Corwin, The Supreme Court as National School Board, 14 Law & Contemp.
Prob. 3, 16 (1949).

[3] The Court thinks it "surpris[ing]" and "truly ... remarkable" to believe
that "the deity the Framers had in mind" (presumably in all the instances of
invocation of the deity I have cited) "was the God of monotheism." _Ante,_ at
879. This reaction would be more comprehensible if the Court could suggest
what other God (in the singular, and with a capital G) there _is,_ other than
"the God of monotheism." This is not _necessarily_ the Christian God (though
if it were, one would expect Christ regularly to be invoked, which He is not);
but it is _inescapably_ the God of monotheism.

[4] This is not to say that a display of the Ten Commandments could never
constitute an impermissible endorsement of a particular religious view. The
Establishment Clause would prohibit, for example, governmental endorsement of
a particular version of the Decalogue as authoritative. Here the display of
the Ten Commandments alongside eight secular documents, and the plaque's
explanation for their inclusion, make clear that they were not posted to take
sides in a theological dispute.

[5] The two exceptions are the March 23, 1798, proclamation of John Adams,
which asks God "freely to remit all our offenses" "through the Redeemer of the
World," http://www.pilgrimhall.org/ThanxProc1789.htm, and the November 17,
1972, proclamation of Richard Nixon, which stated, "From Moses at the Red Sea
to Jesus preparing to feed the multitudes, the Scriptures summon us to words
and deeds of gratitude, even before divine blessings are fully perceived,"
Presidential Proclamation No. 4170, 37 Fed. Reg. 24647 (1972).

[6] JUSTICE STEVENS finds that Presidential inaugural and farewell speeches
(which are the only speeches upon which I have relied) do not violate the
Establishment Clause only because everyone knows that they express the
personal religious views of the speaker, and not government policy. See _Van
Orden_ v. _Perry, ante,_ at 723 (dissenting opinion). This is a peculiar
stance for one who has voted that a student-led invocation at a high school
football game and a rabbi-led invocation at a high school graduation _did_
constitute the sort of governmental endorsement of religion that the
Establishment Clause forbids. See _Santa Fe Independent_ _School Dist._ v.
_Doe,_ 530 U. S. 290 (2000); _Lee_ v. _Weisman,_ 505 U. S. 577 (1992).

[7] See Scalia, Originalism: The Lesser Evil, 57 Cincinnati L. Rev. 849,
852-853 (1989).

[8] Nothing so clearly demonstrates the utter inconsistency of our
Establishment Clause jurisprudence as JUSTICE O'CONNOR'S stirring concurrence
in the present case. "[W]e do not," she says, "count heads before enforcing
the First Amendment." _Ante,_ at 884. But JUSTICE O'CONNOR joined the opinion
of the Court in _Marsh_ v. _Chambers,_ 463 U. S. 783 (1983), which held
legislative prayer to be "a tolerable acknowledgment of beliefs widely held
among the people of this country." _Id.,_ at 792.

[9] The Court's reflexive skepticism of the government's asserted secular
purposes is flatly inconsistent with the deferential approach taken by our
previous Establishment Clause cases. We have repeated many times that, where a
court undertakes the sensitive task of reviewing a government's asserted
purpose, it must take the government at its word absent compelling evidence to
the contrary. See, _e. g.,_ _Edwards_ v. _Aguillard,_ 482 U. S. 578, 586
(1987) (stating that "the Court is . . . deferential to a State's articulation
of a secular purpose," unless that purpose is insincere or a sham); _Mueller_
v. _Allen,_ 463 U. S. 388, 394-395 (1983) (ascribing the Court's
disinclination to invalidate government practices under _Lemon_ 's purpose
prong to its "reluctance to attribute unconstitutional motives to the States,
particularly when a plausible secular purpose for the State's program may be
discerned from the face of the statute"); see also _Wallace_ v. _Jaffree,_ 472
U. S. 38, 74 (1985) (O'CONNOR, J., concurring in judgment) ("[T]he inquiry
into the purpose of the legislature . . . should be deferential and limited").

[10] The Court's only response is that the inclusion of the Ten Commandments
in a display about the foundations of American law reflects "a purpose to
[call on] citizens to act in prescribed ways as a personal response to divine
authority," in a way that legislative prayer and the inclusion of a crèche in
a holiday display do not. See _ante,_ at 878, n. 24. That might be true if the
Commandments were displayed by themselves in a church, or even in someone's
home. It seems to me patently untrue given the Decalogue's "undeniable
historical meaning" as a symbol of the religious foundations of law, see _Van
Orden, ante,_ at 690 (plurality opinion)when they are posted in a courthouse
display of historical documents. The observer would no more think himself
"called upon to act" in conformance with the Commandments than he would think
himself called upon to think and act like William Bradford because of the
courthouse posting of the Mayflower Compactespecially when he is _told_ that
the exhibit consists of documents that contributed to American law and
government.

[11] The significant number of cases involving Ten Commandments displays in
the last two years suggests the breadth of their appearance. See, _e. g.,_
_Books_ v. _Elkhart County,_ 401 F. 3d 857, 858-859 (CA7 2005) (Ten
Commandments included in a display identical to the Foundations Display);
_Mercier_ v. _Fraternal Order of Eagles,_ 395 F. 3d 693, 696 (CA7 2005) (Ten
Commandments monument in city park since 1965); _Modrovich_ v. _Allegheny
County,_ 385 F. 3d 397, 399 (CA3 2004) (Ten Commandments plaque, donated in
1918, on wall of Allegheny County Courthouse); _Freethought Soc. of Greater
Philadelphia_ v. _Chester County,_ 334 F. 3d 247, 249 (CA3 2003) (Ten
Commandments plaque, donated in 1920, on wall of Chester County Courthouse);
_King_ v. _Richmond County,_ 331 F. 3d 1271, 1273-1274 (CA11 2003) (Ten
Commandments depicted in county seal since 1872).

[12] Because there are interpretational differences between faiths and within
faiths concerning the meaning and perhaps even the text of the Commandments,
JUSTICE STEVENS maintains that _any_ display of the text of the Ten
Commandments is impermissible because it "invariably places the [government]
at the center of a serious sectarian dispute." _Van Orden, ante,_ at 718-719
(dissenting opinion). I think not. The sectarian dispute regarding text, if
serious, is not widely known. I doubt that most religious adherents are even
aware that there are competing versions with doctrinal consequences (I
certainly was not). In any event, the context of the display here could not
conceivably cause the viewer to believe that the government was taking sides
in a doctrinal controversy.

[13] Posted less than a month after respondents filed suit, the second
displays included an excerpt from the Declaration of Independence, the
Preamble to the Kentucky Constitution, a page from the Congressional Record
declaring 1983 to be the Year of the Bible and the proclamation of President
Reagan stating the same, a proclamation of President Lincoln designating April
30, 1863, as a National Day of Prayer and Humiliation, an excerpt from
Lincoln's "Reply to Loyal Colored People of Baltimore upon Presentation of a
Bible" stating that "[t]he Bible is the best gift God has ever given to man,"
and the Mayflower Compact. 96 F. Supp. 2d 679, 684 (ED Ky. 2000) (internal
quotation marks omitted). The Counties erected the displays in accordance with
a resolution passed by their legislative bodies, authorizing the County-Judge
Executives "to read or post the Ten Commandments as the precedent legal code
upon which the civil and criminal codes of the Commonwealth of Kentucky are
founded," and to display alongside the Ten Commandments copies of the
documents listed above "without censorship because of any Christian or
religious references in these writings, documents, and historical records."
Def. Exh. 1 in Memorandum in Support of Defendants' Motion to Dismiss in Civ.
Action No. 99-507, p. 1 (ED Ky.) (hereinafter Def. Exh. 1).

[14] Contrary to the Court's suggestion, see _ante,_ at 872, n. 20, it is
clear that the resolutions were closely tied to the second displays, but not
to the third. Each of the documents included in the second displays was
authorized by the resolutions, and those displays, consistent with the
resolutions' direction to "post the Ten Commandments as the precedent legal
code upon which the civil and criminal codes of the Commonwealth of Kentucky
are founded," Def. Exh. 1, _supra,_ n. 13, at 1, consisted of a large copy of
the Ten Commandments alongside much smaller framed copies of other historical,
religious documents. The third displays, in contrast, included documents not
mentioned in the resolutions (the Magna Carta and a picture of Lady Justice)
and did not include documents authorized by the resolutions (correspondence
and proclamations of Abraham Lincoln and the Resolution of Congress declaring
1983 to be the Year of the Bible).

The resolutions also provided that they were to be posted beside the displays
that they authorized. _Id.,_ at 9. Yet respondents have never suggested the
resolutions were posted next to the third displays, and the record before the
Court indicates that they were not. The photos included in the Appendix show
that the third displays included 10 frames the nine historical documents and
the prefatory statement explaining the relevance of each of the documents. See
App. to Pet. for Cert. 177a (McCreary County), 178a (Pulaski County).

