494 U.S. 872

110 S.Ct. 1595

108 L.Ed.2d 876

EMPLOYMENT DIVISION, DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES OF OREGON, et al.,
Petitioners  
v.  
Alfred L. SMITH et al.

No. 88-1213.

Argued Nov. 6, 1989.

Decided April 17, 1990.

Rehearing Denied June 4, 1990.

See 496 U.S. 913, 110 S.Ct. 2605.

_Syllabus_

Respondents Smith and Black were fired by a private drug rehabilitation
organization because they ingested peyote, a hallucinogenic drug, for
sacramental purposes at a ceremony of their Native American Church. Their
applications for unemployment compensation were denied by the State of Oregon
under a state law disqualifying employees discharged for work-related
"misconduct." Holding that the denials violated respondents' First Amendment
free exercise rights, the State Court of Appeals reversed. The State Supreme
Court affirmed, but this Court vacated the judgment and remanded for a
determination whether sacramental peyote use is proscribed by the State's
controlled substance law, which makes it a felony to knowingly or
intentionally possess the drug. Pending that determination, the Court refused
to decide whether such use is protected by the Constitution. On remand, the
State Supreme Court held that sacramental peyote use violated, and was not
excepted from, the state-law prohibition, but concluded that that prohibition
was invalid under the Free Exercise Clause.

_Held:_ The Free Exercise Clause permits the State to prohibit sacramental
peyote use and thus to deny unemployment benefits to persons discharged for
such use. Pp. 876-890.

(a) Although a State would be "prohibiting the free exercise [of religion]" in
violation of the Clause if it sought to ban the performance of (or abstention
from) physical acts solely because of their religious motivation, the Clause
does not relieve an individual of the obligation to comply with a law that
incidentally forbids (or requires) the performance of an act that his
religious belief requires (or forbids) if the law is not specifically directed
to religious practice and is otherwise constitutional as applied to those who
engage in the specified act for nonreligious reasons. See, _e.g., Reynolds v.
United States,_ 98 U.S. 145, 166-167, 25 L.Ed. 244. The only decisions in
which this Court has held that the First Amendment bars application of a
neutral, generally applicable law to religiously motivated action are
distinguished on the ground that they involved not the Free Exercise Clause
alone, but that Clause in conjunction with otherconstitutional protections.
See, _e.g., Cantwell v. Connecticut,_ 310 U.S. 296, 304-307, 60 S.Ct. 900,
903-905, 84 L.Ed. 1213; _Wisconsin v. Yoder,_ 406 U.S. 205, 92 S.Ct. 1526, 32
L.Ed.2d 15. Pp. 876-882.

(b) Respondents' claim for a religious exemption from the Oregon law cannot be
evaluated under the balancing test set forth in the line of cases following
_Sherbert v. Verner,_ 374 U.S. 398, 402-403, 83 S.Ct. 1790, 1792-1794, 10
L.Ed.2d 965, whereby governmental actions that substantially burden a
religious practice must be justified by a "compelling governmental interest."
That test was developed in a context--unemployment compensation eligibility
rules--that lent itself to individualized governmental assessment of the
reasons for the relevant conduct. The test is inapplicable to an across-the-
board criminal prohibition on a particular form of conduct. A holding to the
contrary would create an extraordinary right to ignore generally applicable
laws that are not supported by "compelling governmental interest" on the basis
of religious belief. Nor could such a right be limited to situations in which
the conduct prohibited is "central" to the individual's religion, since that
would enmesh judges in an impermissible inquiry into the centrality of
particular beliefs or practices to a faith. Cf. _Hernandez v. Commissioner,_
490 U.S. 680, 699, 109 S.Ct. 2136, 2148-2149, 104 L.Ed.2d 766. Thus, although
it is constitutionally permissible to exempt sacramental peyote use from the
operation of drug laws, it is not constitutionally required. Pp. 882-890.

307 Or. 68, 763 P.2d 146, reversed.

SCALIA, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which REHNQUIST, C.J., and
WHITE, STEVENS, and KENNEDY, JJ., joined. O'CONNOR, J., filed an opinion
concurring in the judgment, in Parts I and II of which BRENNAN, MARSHALL, and
BLACKMUN, JJ., joined without concurring in the judgment, _post,_ p. 891.
BLACKMUN, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which BRENNAN and MARSHALL, JJ.,
joined, _post,_ p. 907.

David B. Frohnmayer, for petitioners.

Craig J. Dorsay, Portland, Or., for respondents.

Justice SCALIA delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

This case requires us to decide whether the Free Exercise Clause of the First
Amendment permits the State of Oregon to include religiously inspired peyote
use within the reach of its general criminal prohibition on use of that drug,
and thus permits the State to deny unemployment benefits to persons dismissed
from their jobs because of such religiously inspired use.

2

* Oregon law prohibits the knowing or intentional possession of a "controlled substance" unless the substance has been prescribed by a medical practitioner. Ore.Rev.Stat. § 475.992(4) (1987). The law defines "controlled substance" as a drug classified in Schedules I through V of the Federal Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. §§ 811-812, as modified by the State Board of Pharmacy. Ore.Rev.Stat. § 475.005(6) (1987). Persons who violate this provision by possessing a controlled substance listed on Schedule I are "guilty of a Class B felony." § 475.992(4)(a). As compiled by the State Board of Pharmacy under its statutory authority, see, § 475.035, Schedule I contains the drug peyote, a hallucinogen derived from the plant _Lophophora williamsii Lemaire._ Ore.Admin.Rule 855-80-021(3)(s) (1988).

3

Respondents Alfred Smith and Galen Black (hereinafter respondents) were fired
from their jobs with a private drug rehabilitation organization because they
ingested peyote for sacramental purposes at a ceremony of the Native American
Church, of which both are members. When respondents applied to petitioner
Employment Division (hereinafter petitioner) for unemployment compensation,
they were determined to be ineligible for benefits because they had been
discharged for work-related "misconduct." The Oregon Court of Appeals reversed
that determination, holding that the denial of benefits violated respondents'
free exercise rights under the First Amendment.

4

On appeal to the Oregon Supreme Court, petitioner argued that the denial of
benefits was permissible because respondents' consumption of peyote was a
crime under Oregon law. The Oregon Supreme Court reasoned, however, that the
criminality of respondents' peyote use was irrelevant to resolution of their
constitutional claim--since the purpose of the "misconduct" provision under
which respondents had been disqualified was not to enforce the State's
criminal laws but to preserve the financial integrity of the compensation
fund, and since that purpose was inadequate to justify the burden that
disqualification imposed on respondents' religious practice. Citing our
decisions in _Sherbert v. Verner,_ 374 U.S. 398, 83 S.Ct. 1790, 10 L.Ed.2d 965
(1963), and _Thomas v. Review Bd., Indiana Employment Security Div.,_ 450 U.S.
707, 101 S.Ct. 1425, 67 L.Ed.2d 624 (1981), the court concluded that
respondents were entitled to payment of unemployment benefits. _Smith v.
Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources,_ 301 Or. 209, 217-219, 721 P.2d
445, 449-450 (1986). We granted certiorari. 480 U.S. 916, 107 S.Ct. 1368, 94
L.Ed.2d 684 (1987).

5

Before this Court in 1987, petitioner continued to maintain that the
illegality of respondents' peyote consumption was relevant to their
constitutional claim. We agreed, concluding that "if a State has prohibited
through its criminal laws certain kinds of religiously motivated conduct
without violating the First Amendment, it certainly follows that it may impose
the lesser burden of denying unemployment compensation benefits to persons who
engage in that conduct." _Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Oregon
v. Smith,_ 485 U.S. 660, 670, 108 S.Ct. 1444, 1450, 99 L.Ed.2d 753 (1988) (
_Smith I_ ). We noted, however, that the Oregon Supreme Court had not decided
whether respondents' sacramental use of peyote was in fact proscribed by
Oregon's controlled substance law, and that this issue was a matter of dispute
between the parties. Being "uncertain about the legality of the religious use
of peyote in Oregon," we determined that it would not be "appropriate for us
to decide whether the practice is protected by the Federal Constitution."
_Id.,_ at 673, 108 S.Ct., at 1452. Accordingly, we vacated the judgment of the
Oregon Supreme Court and remanded for further proceedings. _Id.,_ at 674, 108
S.Ct., at 1452.

6

On remand, the Oregon Supreme Court held that respondents' religiously
inspired use of peyote fell within the prohibition of the Oregon statute,
which "makes no exception for the sacramental use" of the drug. 307 Or. 68,
72-73, 763 P.2d 146, 148 (1988). It then considered whether that prohibition
was valid under the Free Exercise Clause, and concluded that it was not. The
court therefore reaffirmed its previous ruling that the State could not deny
unemployment benefits to respondents for having engaged in that practice.

7

We again granted certiorari. 489 U.S. 1077, 109 S.Ct. 1526, 103 L.Ed.2d 832
(1989).

II

8

Respondents' claim for relief rests on our decisions in _Sherbert v. Verner,
supra, Thomas v. Review Bd. of Indiana Employment Security Div., supra,_ and
_Hobbie v. Unemployment Appeals Comm'n of Florida,_ 480 U.S. 136, 107 S.Ct.
1046, 94 L.Ed.2d 190 (1987), in which we held that a State could not condition
the availability of unemployment insurance on an individual's willingness to
forgo conduct required by his religion. As we observed in _Smith I,_ however,
the conduct at issue in those cases was not prohibited by law. We held that
distinction to be critical, for "if Oregon does prohibit the religious use of
peyote, and if that prohibition is consistent with the Federal Constitution,
there is no federal right to engage in that conduct in Oregon," and "the State
is free to withhold unemployment compensation from respondents for engaging in
work-related misconduct, despite its religious motivation." 485 U.S., at 672,
108 S.Ct., at 1451. Now that the Oregon Supreme Court has confirmed that
Oregon does prohibit the religious use of peyote, we proceed to consider
whether that prohibition is permissible under the Free Exercise Clause.

A.

9

The Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment, which has been made
applicable to the States by incorporation into the Fourteenth Amendment, see
_Cantwell v. Connecticut,_ 310 U.S. 296, 303, 60 S.Ct. 900, 903, 84 L.Ed. 1213
(1940), provides that "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment
of religion, or _prohibiting the free exercise thereof. . . ._ " U.S. Const.,
Amdt. 1 (emphasis added.) The free exercise of religion means, first and
foremost, the right to believe and profess whatever religious doctrine one
desires. Thus, the First Amendment obviously excludes all "governmental
regulation of religious _beliefs_ as such." _Sherbert v. Verner, supra,_ 374
U.S., at 402, 83 S.Ct., at 1793. The government may not compel affirmation of
religious belief, see _Torcaso v. Watkins,_ 367 U.S. 488, 81 S.Ct. 1680, 6
L.Ed.2d 982 (1961), punish the expression of religious doctrines it believes
to be false, _United States v. Ballard,_ 322 U.S. 78, 86-88, 64 S.Ct. 882,
886-87, 88 L.Ed. 1148 (1944), impose special disabilities on the basis of
religious views or religious status, see _McDaniel v. Paty,_ 435 U.S. 618, 98
S.Ct. 1322, 55 L.Ed.2d 593 (1978); _Fowler v. Rhode Island,_ 345 U.S. 67, 69,
73 S.Ct. 526, 527, 97 L.Ed. 828 (1953); cf. _Larson v. Valente,_ 456 U.S. 228,
245, 102 S.Ct. 1673, 1683-84, 72 L.Ed.2d 33 (1982), or lend its power to one
or the other side in controversies over religious authority or dogma, see
_Presbyterian Church in U.S. v. Mary Elizabeth Blue Hull Memorial Presbyterian
Church,_ 393 U.S. 440, 445 452, 89 S.Ct. 601, 604-608, 21 L.Ed.2d 658 (1969);
_Kedroff v. St. Nicholas Cathedral,_ 344 U.S. 94, 95-119, 73 S.Ct. 143,
143-56, 97 L.Ed. 120 (1952); _Serbian Eastern Orthodox Diocese v.
Milivojevich,_ 426 U.S. 696, 708-725, 96 S.Ct. 2372, 2380-2388, 49 L.Ed.2d 151
(1976).

10

But the "exercise of religion" often involves not only belief and profession
but the performance of (or abstention from) physical acts: assembling with
others for a worship service, participating in sacramental use of bread and
wine, proselytizing, abstaining from certain foods or certain modes of
transportation. It would be true, we think (though no case of ours has
involved the point), that a State would be "prohibiting the free exercise [of
religion]" if it sought to ban such acts or abstentions only when they are
engaged in for religious reasons, or only because of the religious belief that
they display. It would doubtless be unconstitutional, for example, to ban the
casting of "statues that are to be used for worship purposes," or to prohibit
bowing down before a golden calf.

11

Respondents in the present case, however, seek to carry the meaning of
"prohibiting the free exercise [of religion]" one large step further. They
contend that their religious motivation for using peyote places them beyond
the reach of a criminal law that is not specifically directed at their
religious practice, and that is concededly constitutional as applied to those
who use the drug for other reasons. They assert, in other words, that
"prohibiting the free exercise [of religion]" includes requiring any
individual to observe a generally applicable law that requires (or forbids)
the performance of an act that his religious belief forbids (or requires). As
a textual matter, we do not think the words must be given that meaning. It is
no more necessary to regard the collection of a general tax, for example, as
"prohibiting the free exercise [of religion]" by those citizens who believe
support of organized government to be sinful, than it is to regard the same
tax as "abridging the freedom . . . of the press" of those publishing
companies that must pay the tax as a condition of staying in business. It is a
permissible reading of the text, in the one case as in the other, to say that
if prohibiting the exercise of religion (or burdening the activity of
printing) is not the object of the tax but merely the incidental effect of a
generally applicable and otherwise valid provision, the First Amendment has
not been offended. Compare _Citizen Publishing Co. v. United States,_ 394 U.S.
131, 139, 89 S.Ct. 927, 931-32, 22 L.Ed.2d 148 (1969) (upholding application
of antitrust laws to press), with _Grosjean v. American Press Co.,_ 297 U.S.
233, 250-251, 56 S.Ct. 444, 449, 80 L.Ed. 660 (1936) (striking down license
tax applied only to newspapers with weekly circulation above a specified
level); see generally _Minneapolis Star & Tribune Co. v. Minnesota Comm'r of
Revenue,_ 460 U.S. 575, 581, 103 S.Ct. 1365, 1369-70, 75 L.Ed.2d 295 (1983).

12

Our decisions reveal that the latter reading is the correct one. We have never
held that an individual's religious beliefs excuse him from compliance with an
otherwise valid law prohibiting conduct that the State is free to regulate. On
the contrary, the record of more than a century of our free exercise
jurisprudence contradicts that proposition. As described succinctly by Justice
Frankfurter in _Minersville School Dist. Bd. of Ed. v. Gobitis,_ 310 U.S. 586,
594-595, 60 S.Ct. 1010, 1012-1013, 84 L.Ed. 1375 (1940): "Conscientious
scruples have not, in the course of the long struggle for religious
toleration, relieved the individual from obedience to a general law not aimed
at the promotion or restriction of religious beliefs. The mere possession of
religious convictions which contradict the relevant concerns of a political
society does not relieve the citizen from the discharge of political
responsibilities (footnote omitted)." We first had occasion to assert that
principle in _Reynolds v. United States,_ 98 U.S. 145, 25 L.Ed. 244 (1879),
where we rejected the claim that criminal laws against polygamy could not be
constitutionally applied to those whose religion commanded the practice.
"Laws," we said, "are made for the government of actions, and while they
cannot interfere with mere religious belief and opinions, they may with
practices. . . . Can a man excuse his practices to the contrary because of his
religious belief? To permit this would be to make the professed doctrines of
religious belief superior to the law of the land, and in effect to permit
every citizen to become a law unto himself." _Id.,_ at 166-167.

13

Subsequent decisions have consistently held that the right of free exercise
does not relieve an individual of the obligation to comply with a "valid and
neutral law of general applicability on the ground that the law proscribes (or
prescribes) conduct that his religion prescribes (or proscribes)." _United
States v. Lee,_ 455 U.S. 252, 263, n. 3, 102 S.Ct. 1051, 1058, n. 3, 71
L.Ed.2d 127 (1982) (STEVENS, J., concurring in judgment); see _Minersville
School Dist. Bd. of Ed. v. Gobitis, supra,_ 310 U.S., at 595, 60 S.Ct., at
1013 (collecting cases). In _Prince v. Massachusetts,_ 321 U.S. 158, 64 S.Ct.
438, 88 L.Ed. 645 (1944), we held that a mother could be prosecuted under the
child labor laws for using her children to dispense literature in the streets,
her religious motivation notwithstanding. We found no constitutional infirmity
in "excluding [these children] from doing there what no other children may
do." _Id.,_ at 171, 64 S.Ct., at 444. In _Braunfeld v. Brown,_ 366 U.S. 599,
81 S.Ct. 1144, 6 L.Ed.2d 563 (1961) (plurality opinion), we upheld Sunday-
closing laws against the claim that they burdened the religious practices of
persons whose religions compelled them to refrain from work on other days. In
_Gillette v. United States,_ 401 U.S. 437, 461, 91 S.Ct. 828, 842, 28 L.Ed.2d
168 (1971), we sustained the military Selective Service System against the
claim that it violated free exercise by conscripting persons who opposed a
particular war on religious grounds.

14

Our most recent decision involving a neutral, generally applicable regulatory
law that compelled activity forbidden by an individual's religion was _United
States v. Lee,_ 455 U.S., at 258-261, 102 S.Ct., at 1055-1057. There, an Amish
employer, on behalf of himself and his employees, sought exemption from
collection and payment of Social Security taxes on the ground that the Amish
faith prohibited participation in governmental support programs. We rejected
the claim that an exemption was constitutionally required. There would be no
way, we observed, to distinguish the Amish believer's objection to Social
Security taxes from the religious objections that others might have to the
collection or use of other taxes. "If, for example, a religious adherent
believes war is a sin, and if a certain percentage of the federal budget can
be identified as devoted to war-related activities, such individuals would
have a similarly valid claim to be exempt from paying that percentage of the
income tax. The tax system could not function if denominations were allowed to
challenge the tax system because tax payments were spent in a manner that
violates their religious belief." _Id.,_ at 260, 102 S.Ct., at 1056-57. Cf.
_Hernandez v. Commissioner,_ 490 U.S. 680, 109 S.Ct. 2136, 104 L.Ed.2d 766
(1989) (rejecting free exercise challenge to payment of income taxes alleged
to make religious activities more difficult).

15

The only decisions in which we have held that the First Amendment bars
application of a neutral, generally applicable law to religiously motivated
action have involved not the Free Exercise Clause alone, but the Free Exercise
Clause in conjunction with other constitutional protections, such as freedom
of speech and of the press, see _Cantwell v. Connecticut,_ 310 U.S., at
304-307, 60 S.Ct., at 903-905 (invalidating a licensing system for religious
and charitable solicitations under which the administrator had discretion to
deny a license to any cause he deemed nonreligious); _Murdock v.
Pennsylvania,_ 319 U.S. 105, 63 S.Ct. 870, 87 L.Ed. 1292 (1943) (invalidating
a flat tax on solicitation as applied to the dissemination of religious
ideas); _Follett v. McCormick,_ 321 U.S. 573, 64 S.Ct. 717, 88 L.Ed. 938
(1944) (same), or the right of parents, acknowledged in _Pierce v. Society of
Sisters,_ 268 U.S. 510, 45 S.Ct. 571, 69 L.Ed. 1070 (1925), to direct the
education of their children, see _Wisconsin v. Yoder,_ 406 U.S. 205, 92 S.Ct.
1526, 32 L.Ed.2d 15 (1972) (invalidating compulsory school-attendance laws as
applied to Amish parents who refused on religious grounds to send their
children to school).1 Some of our cases prohibiting compelled expression,
decided exclusively upon free speech grounds, have also involved freedom of
religion, cf. _Wooley v. Maynard,_ 430 U.S. 705, 97 S.Ct. 1428, 51 L.Ed.2d 752
(1977) (invalidating compelled display of a license plate slogan that offended
individual religious beliefs); _West Virginia Bd. of Education v. Barnette,_
319 U.S. 624, 63 S.Ct. 1178, 87 L.Ed. 1628 (1943) (invalidating compulsory
flag salute statute challenged by religious objectors). And it is easy to
envision a case in which a challenge on freedom of association grounds would
likewise be reinforced by Free Exercise Clause concerns. _Cf. Roberts v.
United States Jaycees,_ 468 U.S. 609, 622, 104 S.Ct. 3244, 3251-52, 82 L.Ed.2d
462 (1984) ("An individual's freedom to speak, to worship, and to petition the
government for the redress of grievances could not be vigorously protected
from interference by the State [if] a correlative freedom to engage in group
effort toward those ends were not also guaranteed").

16

The present case does not present such a hybrid situation, but a free exercise
claim unconnected with any communicative activity or parental right.
Respondents urge us to hold, quite simply, that when otherwise prohibitable
conduct is accompanied by religious convictions, not only the convictions but
the conduct itself must be free from governmental regulation. We have never
held that, and decline to do so now. There being no contention that Oregon's
drug law represents an attempt to regulate religious beliefs, the
communication of religious beliefs, or the raising of one's children in those
beliefs, the rule to which we have adhered ever since _Reynolds_ plainly
controls. "Our cases do not at their farthest reach support the proposition
that a stance of conscientious opposition relieves an objector from any
colliding duty fixed by a democratic government." _Gillette v. United States,
supra,_ 401 U.S., at 461, 91 S.Ct., at 842.

B

17

Respondents argue that even though exemption from generally applicable
criminal laws need not automatically be extended to religiously motivated
actors, at least the claim for a religious exemption must be evaluated under
the balancing test set forth in _Sherbert v. Verner,_ 374 U.S. 398, 83 S.Ct.
1790, 10 L.Ed.2d 965 (1963). Under the _Sherbert_ test, governmental actions
that substantially burden a religious practice must be justified by a
compelling governmental interest. See _id.,_ at 402-403, 83 S.Ct., at
1792-1794; see also _Hernandez v. Commissioner,_ 490 U.S., at 699, 109 S.Ct.,
at 2148. Applying that test we have, on three occasions, invalidated state
unemployment compensation rules that conditioned the availability of benefits
upon an applicant's willingness to work under conditions forbidden by his
religion. See _Sherbert v. Verner, supra; Thomas v. Review Bd. of Indiana
Employment Security Div.,_ 450 U.S. 707, 101 S.Ct. 1425, 67 L.Ed.2d 624
(1981); _Hobbie v. Unemployment Appeals Comm'n of Florida,_ 480 U.S. 136, 107
S.Ct. 1046, 94 L.Ed.2d 190 (1987). We have never invalidated any governmental
action on the basis of the _Sherbert_ test except the denial of unemployment
compensation. Although we have sometimes purported to apply the _Sherbert_
test in contexts other than that, we have always found the test satisfied, see
_United States v. Lee,_ 455 U.S. 252, 102 S.Ct. 1051, 71 L.Ed.2d 127 (1982);
_Gillette v. United States,_ 401 U.S. 437, 91 S.Ct. 828, 28 L.Ed.2d 168
(1971). In recent years we have abstained from applying the _Sherbert_ test
(outside the unemployment compensation field) at all. In _Bowen v. Roy,_ 476
U.S. 693, 106 S.Ct. 2147, 90 L.Ed.2d 735 (1986), we declined to apply
_Sherbert_ analysis to a federal statutory scheme that required benefit
applicants and recipients to provide their Social Security numbers. The
plaintiffs in that case asserted that it would violate their religious beliefs
to obtain and provide a Social Security number for their daughter. We held the
statute's application to the plaintiffs valid regardless of whether it was
necessary to effectuate a compelling interest. See 476 U.S., at 699-701, 106
S.Ct., at 2151-53. In _Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Assn.,_
485 U.S. 439, 108 S.Ct. 1319, 99 L.Ed.2d 534 (1988), we declined to apply
_Sherbert_ analysis to the Government's logging and road construction
activities on lands used for religious purposes by several Native American
Tribes, even though it was undisputed that the activities "could have
devastating effects on traditional Indian religious practices," 485 U.S., at
451, 108 S.Ct., at 1326. In _Goldman v. Weinberger,_ 475 U.S. 503, 106 S.Ct.
1310, 89 L.Ed.2d 478 (1986), we rejected application of the _Sherbert_ test to
military dress regulations that forbade the wearing of yarmulkes. In _O'Lone
v. Estate of Shabazz,_ 482 U.S. 342, 107 S.Ct. 2400, 96 L.Ed.2d 282 (1987), we
sustained, without mentioning the _Sherbert_ test, a prison's refusal to
excuse inmates from work requirements to attend worship services.

18

Even if we were inclined to breathe into _Sherbert_ some life beyond the
unemployment compensation field, we would not apply it to require exemptions
from a generally applicable criminal law. The _Sherbert_ test, it must be
recalled, was developed in a context that lent itself to individualized
governmental assessment of the reasons for the relevant conduct. As a
plurality of the Court noted in _Roy,_ a distinctive feature of unemployment
compensation programs is that their eligibility criteria invite consideration
of the particular circumstances behind an applicant's unemployment: "The
statutory conditions [in _Sherbert_ and _Thomas_ ] provided that a person was
not eligible for unemployment compensation benefits if, 'without good cause,'
he had quit work or refused available work. The 'good cause' standard created
a mechanism for individualized exemptions." _Bowen v. Roy, supra,_ 476 U.S.,
at 708, 106 S.Ct., at 2156 (opinion of Burger, C.J., joined by Powell and
REHNQUIST, JJ.). See also _Sherbert, supra,_ 374 U.S., at 401, n. 4, 83 S.Ct.,
at 1792, n. 4 (reading state unemployment compensation law as allowing
benefits for unemployment caused by at least some "personal reasons"). As the
plurality pointed out in _Roy,_ our decisions in the unemployment cases stand
for the proposition that where the State has in place a system of individual
exemptions, it may not refuse to extend that system to cases of "religious
hardship" without compelling reason. _Bowen v. Roy, supra,_ 476 U.S., at 708,
106 S.Ct., at 2156-57.

19

Whether or not the decisions are that limited, they at least have nothing to
do with an across-the-board criminal prohibition on a particular form of
conduct. Although, as noted earlier, we have sometimes used the _Sherbert_
test to analyze free exercise challenges to such laws, see _United States v._
Lee, supra, 455 U.S., at 257-260, 102 S.Ct., at 1055-1057; _Gillette v. United
States, supra,_ 401 U.S., at 462, 91 S.Ct., at 842-43, we have never applied
the test to invalidate one. We conclude today that the sounder approach, and
the approach in accord with the vast majority of our precedents, is to hold
the test inapplicable to such challenges. The government's ability to enforce
generally applicable prohibitions of socially harmful conduct, like its
ability to carry out other aspects of public policy, "cannot depend on
measuring the effects of a governmental action on a religious objector's
spiritual development." _Lyng, supra,_ 485 U.S., at 451, 108 S.Ct., at 1326.
To make an individual's obligation to obey such a law contingent upon the
law's coincidence with his religious beliefs, except where the State's
interest is "compelling"--permitting him, by virtue of his beliefs, "to become
a law unto himself," _Reynolds v. United States,_ 98 U.S., at 167--contradicts
both constitutional tradition and common sense.2

20

The "compelling government interest" requirement seems benign, because it is
familiar from other fields. But using it as the standard that must be met
before the government may accord different treatment on the basis of race,
see, _e.g.,_ Palmore v. Sidoti, 466 U.S. 429, 432, 104 S.Ct. 1879, 1881-82, 80
L.Ed.2d 421 (1984), or before the government may regulate the content of
speech, see, _e.g., Sable Communications of California v. FCC,_ 492 U.S. 115,
126, 109 S.Ct. 2829, 2836, 106 L.Ed.2d 93 (1989), is not remotely comparable
to using it for the purpose asserted here. What it produces in those other
fields--equality of treatment and an unrestricted flow of contending speech--
are constitutional norms; what it would produce here--a private right to
ignore generally applicable laws--is a constitutional anomaly.3

21

Nor is it possible to limit the impact of respondents' proposal by requiring a
"compelling state interest" only when the conduct prohibited is "central" to
the individual's religion. Cf. _Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective
Assn.,_ 485 U.S., at 474-476, 108 S.Ct., at 1338-1339 (BRENNAN, J.,
dissenting). It is no more appropriate for judges to determine the
"centrality" of religious beliefs before applying a "compelling interest" test
in the free exercise field, than it would be for them to determine the
"importance" of ideas before applying the "compelling interest" test in the
free speech field. What principle of law or logic can be brought to bear to
contradict a believer's assertion that a particular act is "central" to his
personal faith? Judging the centrality of different religious practices is
akin to the unacceptable "business of evaluating the relative merits of
differing religious claims." _United States v. Lee,_ 455 U.S., at 263 n. 2,
102 S.Ct., at 1058 n. 2 (STEVENS, J., concurring). As we reaffirmed only last
Term, "[i]t is not within the judicial ken to question the centrality of
particular beliefs or practices to a faith, or the validity of particular
litigants' interpretations of those creeds." _Hernandez v. Commissioner,_ 490
U.S., at 699, 109 S.Ct., at 2148. Repeatedly and in many different contexts,
we have warned that courts must not presume to determine the place of a
particular belief in a religion or the plausibility of a religious claim. See,
_e.g., Thomas v. Review Bd. of Indiana Employment Security Div.,_ 450 U.S., at
716, 101 S.Ct., at 1431; _Presbyterian Church in U.S. v. Mary Eliza_ _beth
Blue Hull Memorial Presbyterian Church,_ 393 U.S., at 450, 89 S.Ct., at
606-07; _Jones v. Wolf,_ 443 U.S. 595, 602-606, 99 S.Ct. 3020, 3024-3027, 61
L.Ed.2d 775 (1979); _United States v. Ballard,_ 322 U.S. 78, 85-87, 64 S.Ct.
882, 885-87, 88 L.Ed. 1148 (1944).4

22

If the "compelling interest" test is to be applied at all, then, it must be
applied across the board, to all actions thought to be religiously commanded.
Moreover, if "compelling interest" really means what it says (and watering it
down here would subvert its rigor in the other fields where it is applied),
many laws will not meet the test. Any society adopting such a system would be
courting anarchy, but that danger increases in direct proportion to the
society's diversity of religious beliefs, and its determination to coerce or
suppress none of them. Precisely because "we are a cosmopolitan nation made up
of people of almost every conceivable religious preference," _Braunfeld v.
Brown,_ 366 U.S., at 606, 81 S.Ct., at 1147, and precisely because we value
and protect that religious divergence, we cannot afford the luxury of deeming
_presumptively invalid,_ as applied to the religious objector, every
regulation of conduct that does not protect an interest of the highest order.
The rule respondents favor would open the prospect of constitutionally
required religious exemptions from civic obligations of almost every
conceivable kind ranging from compulsory military service, see, _e.g.,
Gillette v. United States,_ 401 U.S. 437, 91 S.Ct. 828, 28 L.Ed.2d 168 (1971),
to the payment of taxes, see, _e.g., United States v. Lee, supra;_ to health
and safety regulation such as manslaughter and child neglect laws, see, _e.g.,
Funkhouser v. State,_ 763 P.2d 695 (Okla.Crim.App.1988), compulsory
vaccination laws, see, _e.g., Cude v. State,_ 237 Ark. 927, 377 S.W.2d 816
(1964), drug laws, see, _e.g., Olsen v. Drug Enforcement Administration,_ 279
U.S.App.D.C. 1, 878 F.2d 1458 (1989), and traffic laws, see _Cox v. New
Hampshire,_ 312 U.S. 569, 61 S.Ct. 762, 85 L.Ed. 1049 (1941); to social
welfare legislation such as minimum wage laws, see _Tony and Susan Alamo
Foundation v. Secretary of Labor,_ 471 U.S. 290, 105 S.Ct. 1953, 85 L.Ed.2d
278 (1985), child labor laws, see _Prince v. Massachusetts,_ 321 U.S. 158, 64
S.Ct. 438, 88 L.Ed. 645 (1944), animal cruelty laws, see, _e.g., Church of the
Lukumi Babalu Aye Inc. v. City of Hialeah,_ 723 F.Supp. 1467 (SD Fla.1989),
cf. _State v. Massey,_ 229 N.C. 734, 51 S.E.2d 179, appeal dism'd, 336 U.S.
942, 69 S.Ct. 813, 93 L.Ed. 1099 (1949), environmental protection laws, see
_United States v. Little,_ 638 F.Supp. 337 (Mont.1986), and laws providing for
equality of opportunity for the races, see, _e.g., Bob Jones University v.
United States,_ 461 U.S. 574, 603-604, 103 S.Ct. 2017, 2034-2035, 76 L.Ed.2d
157 (1983). The First Amendment's protection of religious liberty does not
require this.5

23

Values that are protected against government interference through enshrinement
in the Bill of Rights are not thereby banished from the political process.
Just as a society that believes in the negative protection accorded to the
press by the First Amendment is likely to enact laws that affirmatively foster
the dissemination of the printed word, so also a society that believes in the
negative protection accorded to religious belief can be expected to be
solicitous of that value in its legislation as well. It is therefore not
surprising that a number of States have made an exception to their drug laws
for sacramental peyote use. See, _e.g.,_ Ariz.Rev.Stat.Ann. §§
13-3402(B)(1)-(3) (1989); Colo.Rev.Stat. § 12-22-317(3) (1985); N.M.Stat.Ann.
§ 30-31-6(D) (Supp.1989). But to say that a nondiscriminatory religious-
practice exemption is permitted, or even that it is desirable, is not to say
that it is constitutionally required, and that the appropriate occasions for
its creation can be discerned by the courts. It may fairly be said that
leaving accommodation to the political process will place at a relative
disadvantage those religious practices that are not widely engaged in; but
that unavoidable consequence of democratic government must be preferred to a
system in which each conscience is a law unto itself or in which judges weigh
the social importance of all laws against the centrality of all religious
beliefs.

24

* * *

25

Because respondents' ingestion of peyote was prohibited under Oregon law, and
because that prohibition is constitutional, Oregon may, consistent with the
Free Exercise Clause, deny respondents unemployment compensation when their
dismissal results from use of the drug. The decision of the Oregon Supreme
Court is accordingly reversed.

26

_It is so ordered._ Justice O'CONNOR, with whom Justice BRENNAN, Justice
MARSHALL, and Justice BLACKMUN join as to Parts I and II, concurring in the
judgment.*

27

Although I agree with the result the Court reaches in this case, I cannot join
its opinion. In my view, today's holding dramatically departs from well-
settled First Amendment jurisprudence, appears unnecessary to resolve the
question presented, and is incompatible with our Nation's fundamental
commitment to individual religious liberty.

28

* At the outset, I note that I agree with the Court's implicit determination that the constitutional question upon which we granted review--whether the Free Exercise Clause protects a person's religiously motivated use of peyote from the reach of a State's general criminal law prohibition--is properly presented in this case. As the Court recounts, respondents Alfred Smith and Galen Black (hereinafter respondents) were denied unemployment compensation benefits because their sacramental use of peyote constituted work-related "misconduct," not because they violated Oregon's general criminal prohibition against possession of peyote. We held, however, in _Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Oregon v. Smith,_ 485 U.S. 660, 108 S.Ct. 1444, 99 L.Ed.2d 753 (1988) ( _Smith I_ ), that whether a State may, consistent with federal law, deny unemployment compensation benefits to persons for their religious use of peyote depends on whether the State, as a matter of state law, has criminalized the underlying conduct. See _id.,_ at 670-672, 108 S.Ct., at 1450-51. The Oregon Supreme Court, on remand from this Court, concluded that "the Oregon statute against possession of controlled substances, which include peyote, makes no exception for the sacramental use of peyote." 307 Or. 68, 72-73, 763 P.2d 146, 148 (1988) (footnote omitted).

29

Respondents contend that, because the Oregon Supreme Court declined to decide
whether the Oregon Constitution prohibits criminal prosecution for the
religious use of peyote, see _id.,_ at 73, n. 3, 763 P.2d, at 148, n. 3, any
ruling on the federal constitutional question would be premature. Respondents
are of course correct that the Oregon Supreme Court may eventually decide that
the Oregon Constitution requires the State to provide an exemption from its
general criminal prohibition for the religious use of peyote. Such a decision
would then reopen the question whether a State may nevertheless deny
unemployment compensation benefits to claimants who are discharged for
engaging in such conduct. As the case comes to us today, however, the Oregon
Supreme Court has plainly ruled that Oregon's prohibition against possession
of controlled substances does not contain an exemption for the religious use
of peyote. In light of our decision in _Smith I,_ which makes this finding a
"necessary predicate to a correct evaluation of respondents' federal claim,"
485 U.S., at 672, 108 S.Ct., at 1451, the question presented and addressed is
properly before the Court.

II

30

The Court today extracts from our long history of free exercise precedents the
single categorical rule that "if prohibiting the exercise of religion . . . is
. . . merely the incidental effect of a generally applicable and otherwise
valid provision, the First Amendment has not been offended." _Ante,_ at 878
(citations omitted). Indeed, the Court holds that where the law is a generally
applicable criminal prohibition, our usual free exercise jurisprudence does
not even apply. _Ante,_ at 884. To reach this sweeping result, however, the
Court must not only give a strained reading of the First Amendment but must
also disregard our consistent application of free exercise doctrine to cases
involving generally applicable regulations that burden religious conduct.

31

* The Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment commands that "Congress shall make no law . . . prohibiting the free exercise [of religion]." In _Cantwell v. Connecticut,_ 310 U.S. 296, 60 S.Ct. 900, 84 L.Ed. 1213 (1940), we held that this prohibition applies to the States by incorporation into the Fourteenth Amendment and that it categorically forbids government regulation of religious beliefs. _Id.,_ at 303, 60 S.Ct., at 903. As the Court recognizes, however, the "free _exercise_ " of religion often, if not invariably, requires the performance of (or abstention from) certain acts. _Ante,_ at 877; cf. 3 A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles 401-402 (J. Murray ed. 1897) (defining "exercise" to include "[t]he practice and performance of rites and ceremonies, worship, etc.; the right or permission to celebrate the observances (of a religion)" and religious observances such as acts of public and private worship, preaching, and prophesying). "[B]elief and action cannot be neatly confined in logic-tight compartments." _Wisconsin v. Yoder,_ 406 U.S. 205, 220, 92 S.Ct. 1526, 32 L.Ed.2d 15 (1972). Because the First Amendment does not distinguish between religious belief and religious conduct, conduct motivated by sincere religious belief, like the belief itself, must be at least presumptively protected by the Free Exercise Clause.

32

The Court today, however, interprets the Clause to permit the government to
prohibit, without justification, conduct mandated by an individual's religious
beliefs, so long as that prohibition is generally applicable. _Ante,_ at 878.
But a law that prohibits certain conduct--conduct that happens to be an act of
worship for someone--manifestly does prohibit that person's free exercise of
his religion. A person who is barred from engaging in religiously motivated
conduct is barred from freely exercising his religion. Moreover, that person
is barred from freely exercising his religion regardless of whether the law
prohibits the conduct only when engaged in for religious reasons, only by
members of that religion, or by all persons. It is difficult to deny that a
law that prohibits religiously motivated conduct, even if the law is generally
applicable, does not at least implicate First Amendment concerns.

33

The Court responds that generally applicable laws are "one large step" removed
from laws aimed at specific religious practices. _Ibid._ The First Amendment,
however, does not distinguish between laws that are generally applicable and
laws that target particular religious practices. Indeed, few States would be
so naive as to enact a law directly prohibiting or burdening a religious
practice as such. Our free exercise cases have all concerned generally
applicable laws that had the effect of significantly burdening a religious
practice. If the First Amendment is to have any vitality, it ought not be
construed to cover only the extreme and hypothetical situation in which a
State directly targets a religious practice. As we have noted in a slightly
different context, " '[s]uch a test has no basis in precedent and relegates a
serious First Amendment value to the barest level of minimum scrutiny that the
Equal Protection Clause already provides.' " _Hobbie v. Unemployment Appeals
Comm'n of Florida,_ 480 U.S. 136, 141-142, 107 S.Ct. 1046, 1049, 94 L.Ed.2d
190 (1987) (quoting _Bowen v. Roy,_ 476 U.S. 693, 727, 106 S.Ct. 2147,
2166-67, 90 L.Ed.2d 735 (1986) (O'CONNOR, J., concurring in part and
dissenting in part)).

34

To say that a person's right to free exercise has been burdened, of course,
does not mean that he has an absolute right to engage in the conduct. Under
our established First Amendment jurisprudence, we have recognized that the
freedom to act, unlike the freedom to believe, cannot be absolute. See, _e.g.,
Cantwell, supra,_ 310 U.S., at 304, 60 S.Ct., at 903-04; _Reynolds v. United
States,_ 98 U.S. 145, 161-167, 25 L.Ed. 244 (1879). Instead, we have respected
both the First Amendment's express textual mandate and the governmental
interest in regulation of conduct by requiring the government to justify any
substantial burden on religiously motivated conduct by a compelling state
interest and by means narrowly tailored to achieve that interest. See
_Hernandez v. Commissioner,_ 490 U.S. 680, 699, 109 S.Ct. 2136, 2148, 104
L.Ed.2d 766 (1989); _Hobbie, supra,_ 480 U.S., at 141, 107 S.Ct., at 1049;
_United States v. Lee,_ 455 U.S. 252, 257-258 (1982); _Thomas v. Review Bd. of
Indiana Employment Security Div.,_ 450 U.S. 707, 718, 101 S.Ct. 1425, 1432, 67
L.Ed.2d 624 (1981); _McDaniel v. Paty,_ 435 U.S. 618, 626-629, 98 S.Ct. 1322,
1327-1329, 55 L.Ed.2d 593 (1978) (plurality opinion); _Yoder, supra,_ 406
U.S., at 215, 92 S.Ct., at 1533; _Gillette v. United States,_ 401 U.S. 437,
462, 91 S.Ct. 828, 842, 28 L.Ed.2d 168 (1971); _Sherbert v. Verner,_ 374 U.S.
398, 403, 83 S.Ct. 1790, 1793-94, 10 L.Ed.2d 965 (1963); see also _Bowen v.
Roy, supra,_ 476 U.S., at 732, 106 S.Ct., at 2169 (opinion concurring in part
and dissenting in part); _West Virginia State Bd. of Ed. v. Barnette,_ 319
U.S. 624, 639, 63 S.Ct. 1178, 1186, 87 L.Ed. 1628 (1943). The compelling
interest test effectuates the First Amendment's command that religious liberty
is an independent liberty, that it occupies a preferred position, and that the
Court will not permit encroachments upon this liberty, whether direct or
indirect, unless required by clear and compelling governmental interests "of
the highest order," _Yoder, supra,_ 406 U.S., at 215, 92 S.Ct., at 1533. "Only
an especially important governmental interest pursued by narrowly tailored
means can justify exacting a sacrifice of First Amendment freedoms as the
price for an equal share of the rights, benefits, and privileges enjoyed by
other citizens." _Roy, supra,_ 476 U.S., at 728, 106 S.Ct., at 2167 (opinion
concurring in part and dissenting in part).

35

The Court attempts to support its narrow reading of the Clause by claiming
that "[w]e have never held that an individual's religious beliefs excuse him
from compliance with an otherwise valid law prohibiting conduct that the State
is free to regulate." _Ante,_ at 878-879. But as the Court later notes, as it
must, in cases such as _Cantwell_ and _Yoder_ we have in fact interpreted the
Free Exercise Clause to forbid application of a generally applicable
prohibition to religiously motivated conduct. See _Cantwell,_ 310 U.S., at
304-307, 60 S.Ct., at 903-905; _Yoder,_ 406 U.S., at 214-234, 92 S.Ct., at
1532-1542. Indeed, in _Yoder_ we expressly rejected the interpretation the
Court now adopts:

36

"[O]ur decisions have rejected the idea that religiously grounded conduct is
always outside the protection of the Free Exercise Clause. It is true that
activities of individuals, even when religiously based, are often subject to
regulation by the States in the exercise of their undoubted power to promote
the health, safety, and general welfare, or the Federal Government in the
exercise of its delegated powers. But to agree that religiously grounded
conduct must often be subject to the broad police power of the State is not to
deny that there are areas of conduct protected by the Free Exercise Clause of
the First Amendment and thus beyond the power of the State to control, _even
under regulations of general applicability_. . . .

37

". . . A regulation neutral on its face may, in its application, nonetheless
offend the constitutional requirement for government neutrality if it unduly
burdens the free exercise of religion." _Id.,_ at 219-220, 92 S.Ct., at
1535-36 (emphasis added; citations omitted).

38

The Court endeavors to escape from our decisions in _Cantwell_ and _Yoder_ by
labeling them "hybrid" decisions, _ante,_ at 892, but there is no denying that
both cases expressly relied on the Free Exercise Clause, see _Cantwell,_ 310
U.S., at 303-307, 60 S.Ct., at 903-905; _Yoder, supra,_ 406 U.S., at 219-229,
92 S.Ct., at 1535-1540, and that we have consistently regarded those cases as
part of the mainstream of our free exercise jurisprudence. Moreover, in each
of the other cases cited by the Court to support its categorical rule, _ante,_
at 879-880, we rejected the particular constitutional claims before us only
after carefully weighing the competing interests. See _Prince v.
Massachusetts,_ 321 U.S. 158, 168-170, 64 S.Ct. 438, 443-444, 88 L.Ed. 645
(1944) (state interest in regulating children's activities justifies denial of
religious exemption from child labor laws); _Braunfeld v. Brown,_ 366 U.S.
599, 608-609, 81 S.Ct. 1144, 1148-1149, 6 L.Ed.2d 563 (1961) (plurality
opinion) (state interest in uniform day of rest justifies denial of religious
exemption from Sunday closing law); _Gillette, supra,_ 401 U.S., at 462, 91
S.Ct., at 842-43 (state interest in military affairs justifies denial of
religious exemption from conscription laws); _Lee, supra,_ 455 U.S., at
258-259, 102 S.Ct., at 1055-1056 (state interest in comprehensive Social
Security system justifies denial of religious exemption from mandatory
participation requirement). That we rejected the freeexer cise claims in those
cases hardly calls into question the applicability of First Amendment doctrine
in the first place. Indeed, it is surely unusual to judge the vitality of a
constitutional doctrine by looking to the win-loss record of the plaintiffs
who happen to come before us.

B

39

Respondents, of course, do not contend that their conduct is automatically
immune from all governmental regulation simply because it is motivated by
their sincere religious beliefs. The Court's rejection of that argument,
_ante,_ at 882, might therefore be regarded as merely harmless dictum. Rather,
respondents invoke our traditional compelling interest test to argue that the
Free Exercise Clause requires the State to grant them a limited exemption from
its general criminal prohibition against the possession of peyote. The Court
today, however, denies them even the opportunity to make that argument,
concluding that "the sounder approach, and the approach in accord with the
vast majority of our precedents, is to hold the [compelling interest] test
inapplicable to" challenges to general criminal prohibitions. _Ante,_ at 885.

40

In my view, however, the essence of a free exercise claim is relief from a
burden imposed by government on religious practices or beliefs, whether the
burden is imposed directly through laws that prohibit or compel specific
religious practices, or indirectly through laws that, in effect, make
abandonment of one's own religion or conformity to the religious beliefs of
others the price of an equal place in the civil community. As we explained in
_Thomas:_

41

"Where the state conditions receipt of an important benefit upon conduct
proscribed by a religious faith, or where it denies such a benefit because of
conduct mandated by religious belief, thereby putting substantial pressure on
an adherent to modify his behavior and to violate his beliefs, a burden upon
religion exists." 450 U.S., at 717-718, 101 S.Ct., at 1432.

42

See also _Frazee v. Illinois Dept. of Employment Security,_ 489 U.S. 829, 832,
109 S.Ct. 1514, 1516-1517, 103 L.Ed.2d 914 (1989); _Hobbie,_ 480 U.S., at 141,
107 S.Ct., at 1049. A State that makes criminal an individual's religiously
motivated conduct burdens that individual's free exercise of religion in the
severest manner possible, for it "results in the choice to the individual of
either abandoning his religious principle or facing criminal prosecution."
_Braunfeld, supra,_ 366 U.S., at 605, 81 S.Ct., at 1147. I would have thought
it beyond argument that such laws implicate free exercise concerns.

43

Indeed, we have never distinguished between cases in which a State conditions
receipt of a benefit on conduct prohibited by religious beliefs and cases in
which a State affirmatively prohibits such conduct. The _Sherbert_ compelling
interest test applies in both kinds of cases. See, _e.g., Lee,_ 455 U.S., at
257-260, 102 S.Ct., at 1055-1057 (applying _Sherbert_ to uphold Social
Security tax liability); _Gillette,_ 401 U.S., at 462, 91 S.Ct., at 842-43
(applying _Sherbert_ to uphold military conscription requirement); _Yoder,_
406 U.S., at 215-234, 92 S.Ct., at 1533-1538 (applying _Sherbert_ to strike
down criminal convictions for violation of compulsory school attendance law).
As I noted in _Bowen v. Roy_ :

44

"The fact that the underlying dispute involves an award of benefits rather
than an exaction of penalties does not grant the Government license to apply a
different version of the Constitution. . . .

45

". . . The fact that appellees seek exemption from a precondition that the
Government attaches to an award of benefits does not, therefore, generate a
meaningful distinction between this case and one where appellees seek an
exemption from the Government's imposition of penalties upon them." 476 U.S.,
at 731-732, 106 S.Ct., at 2168-2169 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting
in part).

46

See also _Hobbie, supra,_ 480 U.S., at 141-142, 107 S.Ct., at 1049-1050;
_Sherbert,_ 374 U.S., at 404, 83 S.Ct., at 1794. I would reaffirm that
principle today: A neutral criminal law prohibiting conduct that a State may
legitimately regulate is, if anything, _more_ burdensome than a neutral civil
statute placing legitimate conditions on the award of a state benefit.

47

Legislatures, of course, have always been "left free to reach actions which
were in violation of social duties or subversive of good order." _Reynolds,_
98 U.S., at 164; see also _Yoder, supra_ , at 219-220, 92 S.Ct., at 1535-1536;
_Braunfeld,_ 366 U.S., at 603-604, 81 S.Ct., at 1145-1146. Yet because of the
close relationship between conduct and religious belief, "[i]n every case the
power to regulate must be so exercised as not, in attaining a permissible end,
unduly to infringe the protected freedom." _Cantwell,_ 310 U.S., at 304, 60
S.Ct., at 903. Once it has been shown that a government regulation or criminal
prohibition burdens the free exercise of religion, we have consistently asked
the government to demonstrate that unbending application of its regulation to
the religious objector "is essential to accomplish an overriding governmental
interest," _Lee, supra,_ 455 U.S., at 257-258, 102 S.Ct., at 1055, or
represents "the least restrictive means of achieving some compelling state
interest," _Thomas, supra,_ 450 U.S., at 718, 101 S.Ct., at 1432. See, _e.g.,
Braunfeld, supra,_ 366 U.S. at 607, 81 S.Ct., at 1148; _Sherbert, supra,_ 374
U.S., at 406, 83 S.Ct., at 1795; _Yoder, supra,_ 406 U.S., at 214-215, 92
S.Ct., at 1532-1533; _Roy,_ 476 U.S., at 728-732, 106 S.Ct., at 2167-2169
(opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). To me, the sounder
approach--the approach more consistent with our role as judges to decide each
case on its individual merits--is to apply this test in each case to determine
whether the burden on the specific plaintiffs before us is constitutionally
significant and whether the particular criminal interest asserted by the State
before us is compelling. Even if, as an empirical matter, a government's
criminal laws might usually serve a compelling interest in health, safety, or
public order, the First Amendment at least requires a case-by-case
determination of the question, sensitive to the facts of each particular
claim. Cf. _McDaniel,_ 435 U.S., at 628, n. 8, 98 S.Ct., at 1328, n. 8
(plurality opinion) (noting application of _Sherbert_ to general criminal
prohibitions and the "delicate balancing required by our decisions in"
_Sherbert_ and _Yoder_ ). Given the range of conduct that a State might
legitimately make criminal, we cannot assume, merely because a law carries
criminal sanctions and is generally applicable, that the First Amendment
_never_ requires the State to grant a limited exemption for religiously
motivated conduct.

48

Moreover, we have not "rejected" or "declined to apply" the compelling
interest test in our recent cases. _Ante,_ at 883-884. Recent cases have
instead affirmed that test as a fundamental part of our First Amendment
doctrine. See, _e.g., Hernandez,_ 490 U.S., at 699, 109 S.Ct., at 2148-2149;
_Hobbie, supra,_ 480 U.S., at 141-142, 107 S.Ct., at 1049-1050 (rejecting
Chief Justice Burger's suggestion in _Roy, supra,_ 476 U.S., at 707-708, 106
S.Ct., at 2156-2157, that free exercise claims be assessed under a less
rigorous "reasonable means" standard). The cases cited by the Court signal no
retreat from our consistent adherence to the compelling interest test. In both
_Bowen v. Roy, supra,_ and _Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective
Assn.,_ 485 U.S. 439, 108 S.Ct. 1319, 99 L.Ed.2d 534 (1988), for example, we
expressly distinguished _Sherbert_ on the ground that the First Amendment does
not "require the Government _itself_ to behave in ways that the individual
believes will further his or her spiritual development. . . . The Free
Exercise Clause simply cannot be understood to require the Government to
conduct its own internal affairs in ways that comport with the religious
beliefs of particular citizens." _Roy, supra,_ 476 U.S., at 699, 106 S.Ct., at
2152; see _Lyng, supra,_ 485 U.S., at 449, 108 S.Ct., at 1325. This
distinction makes sense because "the Free Exercise Clause is written in terms
of what the government cannot do to the individual, not in terms of what the
individual can exact from the government." _Sherbert, supra,_ 374 U.S., at
412, 83 S.Ct., at 1798 (Douglas, J., concurring). Because the case _sub
judice,_ like the other cases in which we have applied _Sherbert,_ plainly
falls into the former category, I would apply those established precedents to
the facts of this case.

49

Similarly, the other cases cited by the Court for the proposition that we have
rejected application of the _Sherbert_ test outside the unemployment
compensation field, _ante,_ at 884, are distinguishable because they arose in
the narrow, specialized contexts in which we have not traditionally required
the government to justify a burden on religious conduct by articulating a
compelling interest. See _Goldman v. Weinberger,_ 475 U.S. 503, 507, 106 S.Ct.
1310, 1313, 89 L.Ed.2d 478 (1986) ("Our review of military regulations
challenged on First Amendment grounds is far more deferential than
constitutional review of similar laws or regulations designed for civilian
society"); _O'Lone v. Estate of Shabazz,_ 482 U.S. 342, 349, 107 S.Ct. 2400,
2404, 96 L.Ed.2d 282 (1987) ("[P]rison regulations alleged to infringe
constitutional rights are judged under a 'reasonableness' test less
restrictive than that ordinarily applied to alleged infringements of
fundamental constitutional rights") (citation omitted). That we did not apply
the compelling interest test in these cases says nothing about whether the
test should continue to apply in paradigm free exercise cases such as the one
presented here.

50

The Court today gives no convincing reason to depart from settled First
Amendment jurisprudence. There is nothing talismanic about neutral laws of
general applicability or general criminal prohibitions, for laws neutral
toward religion can coerce a person to violate his religious conscience or
intrude upon his religious duties just as effectively as laws aimed at
religion. Although the Court suggests that the compelling interest test, as
applied to generally applicable laws, would result in a "constitutional
anomaly," _ante,_ at 886, the First Amendment unequivocally makes freedom of
religion, like freedom from race discrimination and freedom of speech, a
"constitutional nor[m]," not an "anomaly." _Ibid._ Nor would application of
our established free exercise doctrine to this case necessarily be
incompatible with our equal protection cases. Cf. _Rogers v. Lodge,_ 458 U.S.
613, 618, 102 S.Ct. 3272, 3276, 73 L.Ed.2d 1012 (1982) (race-neutral law that
" 'bears more heavily on one race than another' " may violate equal
protection) (citation omitted); _Castaneda v. Partida,_ 430 U.S. 482, 492-495,
97 S.Ct. 1272, 1278-1281, 51 L.Ed.2d 498 (1977) (grand jury selection). We
have in any event recognized that the Free Exercise Clause protects values
distinct from those protected by the Equal Protection Clause. See _Hobbie,_
480 U.S., at 141-142, 107 S.Ct., at 1049. As the language of the Clause itself
makes clear, an individual's free exercise of religion is a preferred
constitutional activity. See, _e.g.,_ McConnell, Accommodation of Religion,
1985 S.Ct.Rev. 1, 9 ("[T]he text of the First Amendment itself 'singles out'
religion for special protections"); P. Kauper, Religion and the Constitution
17 (1964). A law that makes criminal such an activity therefore triggers
constitutional concern--and heightened judicial scrutiny even if it does not
target the particular religious conduct at issue. Our free speech cases
similarly recognize that neutral regulations that affect free speech values
are subject to a balancing, rather than categorical, approach. See, _e.g.,
United States v. O'Brien,_ 391 U.S. 367, 377, 88 S.Ct. 1673, 1679, 20 L.Ed.2d
672 (1968); _Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc.,_ 475 U.S. 41, 46-47, 106 S.Ct.
925, 928-929, 89 L.Ed.2d 29 (1986); cf. _Anderson v. Celebrezze,_ 460 U.S.
780, 792-794, 103 S.Ct. 1564, 1571-1573, 75 L.Ed.2d 547 (1983) (generally
applicable laws may impinge on free association concerns). The Court's parade
of horribles, _ante,_ at 888-889, not only fails as a reason for discarding
the compelling interest test, it instead demonstrates just the opposite: that
courts have been quite capable of applying our free exercise jurisprudence to
strike sensible balances between religious liberty and competing state
interests.

51

Finally, the Court today suggests that the disfavoring of minority religions
is an "unavoidable consequence" under our system of government and that
accommodation of such religions must be left to the political process. _Ante,_
at 890. In my view, however, the First Amendment was enacted precisely to
protect the rights of those whose religious practices are not shared by the
majority and may be viewed with hostility. The history of our free exercise
doctrine amply demonstrates the harsh impact majoritarian rule has had on
unpopular or emerging religious groups such as the Jehovah's Witnesses and the
Amish. Indeed, the words of Justice Jackson in _West Virginia State Bd. of Ed.
v. Barnette_ (overruling _Minersville School Dist. v. Gobitis,_ 310 U.S. 586,
60 S.Ct. 1010, 84 L.Ed. 1375 (1940)) are apt: "The very purpose of a Bill of
Rights was to withdraw certain subjects from the vicissitudes of political
controversy, to place them beyond the reach of majorities and officials and to
establish them as legal principles to be applied by the courts. One's right to
life, liberty, and property, to free speech, a free press, freedom of worship
and assembly, and other fundamental rights may not be submitted to vote; they
depend on the outcome of no elections." 319 U.S., at 638, 63 S.Ct., at 1185.

52

See also _United States v. Ballard,_ 322 U.S. 78, 87, 64 S.Ct. 882, 886-87, 88
L.Ed. 1148 (1944) ("The Fathers of the Constitution were not unaware of the
varied and extreme views of religious sects, of the violence of disagreement
among them, and of the lack of any one religious creed on which all men would
agree. They fashioned a charter of government which envisaged the widest
possible toleration of conflicting views"). The compelling interest test
reflects the First Amendment's mandate of preserving religious liberty to the
fullest extent possible in a pluralistic society. For the Court to deem this
command a "luxury," _ante,_ at 888, is to denigrate "[t]he very purpose of a
Bill of Rights."

III

53

The Court's holding today not only misreads settled First Amendment precedent;
it appears to be unnecessary to this case. I would reach the same result
applying our established free exercise jurisprudence.

A.

54

There is no dispute that Oregon's criminal prohibition of peyote places a
severe burden on the ability of respondents to freely exercise their religion.
Peyote is a sacrament of the Native American Church and is regarded as vital
to respondents' ability to practice their religion. See O. Stewart, Peyote
Religion: A History 327-336 (1987) (describing modern status of peyotism); E.
Anderson, Peyote: The Divine Cactus 41-65 (1980) (describing peyote
ceremonies); Teachings from the American Earth: Indian Religion and Philosophy
96-104 (D. Tedlock & B. Tedlock eds. 1975) (same); see also _People v. Woody,_
61 Cal.2d 716, 721-722, 40 Cal.Rptr. 69, 73-74, 394 P.2d 813, 817-818 (1964).
As we noted in _Smith I,_ the Oregon Supreme Court concluded that "the Native
American Church is a recognized religion, that peyote is a sacrament of that
church, and that respondent's beliefs were sincerely held." 485 U.S., at 667,
108 S.Ct., at 1449. Under Oregon law, as construed by that State's highest
court, members of the Native American Church must choose between carrying out
the ritual embodying their religious beliefs and avoidance of criminal
prosecution. That choice is, in my view, more than sufficient to trigger First
Amendment scrutiny.

55

There is also no dispute that Oregon has a significant interest in enforcing
laws that control the possession and use of controlled substances by its
citizens. See, _e.g., Sherbert,_ 374 U.S., at 403, 83 S.Ct., at 1793-94
(religiously motivated conduct may be regulated where such conduct "pose[s]
some substantial threat to public safety, peace or order"); _Yoder,_ 406 U.S.,
at 220, 92 S.Ct., at 1535 ("[A]ctivities of individuals, even when religiously
based, are often subject to regulation by the States in the exercise of their
undoubted power to promote the health, safety, and general welfare"). As we
recently noted, drug abuse is "one of the greatest problems affecting the
health and welfare of our population" and thus "one of the most serious
problems confronting our society today." _Treasury Employees v. Von Raab,_ 489
U.S. 656, 668, 674, 109 S.Ct. 1384, 1395, 103 L.Ed.2d 685 (1989). Indeed,
under federal law (incorporated by Oregon law in relevant part, see
Ore.Rev.Stat. § 475.005(6) (1987)), peyote is specifically regulated as a
Schedule I controlled substance, which means that Congress has found that it
has a high potential for abuse, that there is no currently accepted medical
use, and that there is a lack of accepted safety for use of the drug under
medical supervision. See 21 U.S.C. § 812(b)(1). See generally R. Julien, A
Primer of Drug Action 149 (3d ed. 1981). In light of our recent decisions
holding that the governmental interests in the collection of income tax,
_Hernandez,_ 490 U.S., at 699-700, 109 S.Ct., at 2148-2149, a comprehensive
Social Security system, see _Lee,_ 455 U.S., at 258-259, 102 S.Ct., at
1055-1056, and military conscription, see _Gillette,_ 401 U.S., at 460, 91
S.Ct., at 841, are compelling, respondents do not seriously dispute that
Oregon has a compelling interest in prohibiting the possession of peyote by
its citizens.

B

56

Thus, the critical question in this case is whether exempting respondents from
the State's general criminal prohibition "will unduly interfere with
fulfillment of the governmental interest." _Lee, supra,_ 455 U.S. at 259, 102
S.Ct., at 1056; see also _Roy,_ 476 U.S., at 727, 106 S.Ct., at 2166 ("[T]he
Government must accommodate a legitimate free exercise claim unless pursuing
an especially important interest by narrowly tailored means"); _Yoder, supra,_
406 U.S., at 221, 92 S.Ct., at 1536; _Braunfeld,_ 366 U.S., at 605-607, 81
S.Ct., at 1146-1148. Although the question is close, I would conclude that
uniform application of Oregon's criminal prohibition is "essential to
accomplish," _Lee, supra,_ at 455 U.S., at 257, 102 S.Ct., at 1055, its
overriding interest in preventing the physical harm caused by the use of a
Schedule I controlled substance. Oregon's criminal prohibition represents that
State's judgment that the possession and use of controlled substances, even by
only one person, is inherently harmful and dangerous. Because the health
effects caused by the use of controlled substances exist regardless of the
motivation of the user, the use of such substances, even for religious
purposes, violates the very purpose of the laws that prohibit them. Cf. _State
v. Massey,_ 229 N.C. 734, 51 S.E.2d 179 (denying religious exemption to
municipal ordinance prohibiting handling of poisonous reptiles), appeal dism'd
_sub nom. Bunn v. North Carolina,_ 336 U.S. 942, 69 S.Ct. 813, 93 L.Ed. 1099
(1949). Moreover, in view of the societal interest in preventing trafficking
in controlled substances, uniform application of the criminal prohibition at
issue is essential to the effectiveness of Oregon's stated interest in
preventing any possession of peyote. Cf. _Jacobson v._ Massachusetts, 197 U.S.
11, 25 S.Ct. 358, 49 L.Ed. 643 (1905) (denying exemption from small pox
vaccination requirement).

57

For these reasons, I believe that granting a selective exemption in this case
would seriously impair Oregon's compelling interest in prohibiting possession
of peyote by its citizens. Under such circumstances, the Free Exercise Clause
does not require the State to accommodate respondents' religiously motivated
conduct. See, _e.g., Thomas,_ 450 U.S., at 719, 101 S.Ct., at 1432-33. Unlike
in _Yoder,_ where we noted that "[t]he record strongly indicates that
accommodating the religious objections of the Amish by forgoing one, or at
most two, additional years of compulsory education will not impair the
physical or mental health of the child, or result in an inability to be self-
supporting or to discharge the duties and responsibilities of citizenship, or
in any other way materially detract from the welfare of society," 406 U.S., at
234, 92 S.Ct., at 1542; see also _id.,_ at 238-240, 92 S.Ct., at 1544-1545
(WHITE, J., concurring), a religious exemption in this case would be
incompatible with the State's interest in controlling use and possession of
illegal drugs.

58

Respondents contend that any incompatibility is belied by the fact that the
Federal Government and several States provide exemptions for the religious use
of peyote, see 21 CFR § 1307.31 (1989); 307 Or., at 73, n. 2, 763 P.2d, at
148, n. 2 (citing 11 state statutes that expressly exempt sacramental peyote
use from criminal proscription). But other governments may surely choose to
grant an exemption without Oregon, with its specific asserted interest in
uniform application of its drug laws, being _required_ to do so by the First
Amendment. Respondents also note that the sacramental use of peyote is central
to the tenets of the Native American Church, but I agree with the Court,
_ante,_ at 886-887, that because " '[i]t is not within the judicial ken to
question the centrality of particular beliefs or practices to a faith,' "
quoting _Hernandez, supra,_ at 699, 109 S.Ct., at 2148, our determination of
the constitutionality of Oregon's general criminal prohibition cannot, and
should not, turn on the centrality of the particular religious practice at
issue. This does not mean, of course, that courts may not make factual
findings as to whether a claimant holds a sincerely held religious belief that
conflicts with, and thus is burdened by, the challenged law. The distinction
between questions of centrality and questions of sincerity and burden is
admittedly fine, but it is one that is an established part of our free
exercise doctrine, see _Ballard,_ 322 U.S., at 85-88, 64 S.Ct., at 885-87, and
one that courts are capable of making. See _Tony and Susan Alamo Foundation v.
Secretary of Labor,_ 471 U.S. 290, 303-305, 105 S.Ct.1953, 1962-1963, 85
L.Ed.2d 278 (1985).

59

I would therefore adhere to our established free exercise jurisprudence and
hold that the State in this case has a compelling interest in regulating
peyote use by its citizens and that accommodating respondents' religiously
motivated conduct "will unduly interfere with fulfillment of the governmental
interest." _Lee, supra,_ 455 U.S., at 259, 102 S.Ct., at 1056. Accordingly, I
concur in the judgment of the Court.

60

Justice BLACKMUN, with whom Justice BRENNAN and Justice MARSHALL join,
dissenting.

61

This Court over the years painstakingly has developed a consistent and
exacting standard to test the constitutionality of a state statute that
burdens the free exercise of religion. Such a statute may stand only if the
law in general, and the State's refusal to allow a religious exemption in
particular, are justified by a compelling interest that cannot be served by
less restrictive means.1 Until today, I thought this was a settled and
inviolate principle of this Court's First Amendment jurisprudence. The
majority, however, perfunctorily dismisses it as a "constitutional anomaly."
_Ante,_ at 886. As carefully detailed in Justice O'CONNOR's concurring
opinion, _ante,_ p. 891, the majority is able to arrive at this view only by
mischaracterizing this Court's precedents. The Court discards leading free
exercise cases such as _Cantwell v. Connecticut,_ 310 U.S. 296, 60 S.Ct. 900,
84 L.Ed. 1213 (1940), and _Wisconsin v. Yoder,_ 406 U.S. 205, 92 S.Ct. 1526,
32 L.Ed.2d 15 (1972), as "hybrid." _Ante,_ at 882. The Court views traditional
free exercise analysis as somehow inapplicable to criminal prohibitions (as
opposed to conditions on the receipt of benefits), and to state laws of
general applicability (as opposed, presumably, to laws that expressly single
out religious practices). _Ante,_ at 884-885. The Court cites cases in which,
due to various exceptional circumstances, we found strict scrutiny inapposite,
to hint that the Court has repudiated that standard altogether. _Ante,_ at
882-884. In short, it effectuates a wholesale overturning of settled law
concerning the Religion Clauses of our Constitution. One hopes that the Court
is aware of the consequences, and that its result is not a product of
overreaction to the serious problems the country's drug crisis has generated.

62

This distorted view of our precedents leads the majority to conclude that
strict scrutiny of a state law burdening the free exercise of religion is a
"luxury" that a well-ordered society cannot afford, _ante,_ at 888, and that
the repression of minority religions is an "unavoidable consequence of
democratic government." _Ante,_ at 890. I do not believe the Founders thought
their dearly bought freedom from religious persecution a "luxury," but an
essential element of liberty--and they could not have thought religious
intolerance "unavoidable," for they drafted the Religion Clauses precisely in
order to avoid that intolerance.

63

For these reasons, I agree with Justice O'CONNOR's analysis of the applicable
free exercise doctrine, and I join parts I and II of her opinion.2 As she
points out, "the critical question in this case is whether exempting
respondents from the State's general criminal prohibition 'will unduly
interfere with fulfillment of the governmental interest.' " _Ante,_ at 905,
quoting _United States v. Lee,_ 455 U.S. 252, 259, 102 S.Ct. 1051, 1056, 71
L.Ed.2d 127 (1982). I do disagree, however, with her specific answer to that
question.

64

* In weighing the clear interest of respondents Smith and Black (hereinafter respondents) in the free exercise of their religion against Oregon's asserted interest in enforcing its drug laws, it is important to articulate in precise terms the state interest involved. It is not the State's broad interest in fighting the critical "war on drugs" that must be weighed against respondents' claim, but the State's narrow interest in refusing to make an exception for the religious, ceremonial use of peyote. See _Bowen v. Roy,_ 476 U.S. 693, 728, 106 S.Ct. 2147, 2167, 90 L.Ed.2d 735 (1986) (O'CONNOR, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) ("This Court has consistently asked the Government to demonstrate that unbending application of its regulation to the religious objector 'is essential to accomplish an overriding governmental interest,' " quoting _Lee,_ 455 U.S., at 257-258, 102 S.Ct., at 1055); _Thomas v. Review Bd. of Indiana Employment Security Div.,_ 450 U.S. 707, 719, 101 S.Ct. 1425, 1432, 67 L.Ed.2d 624 (1981) ("focus of the inquiry" concerning State's asserted interest must be "properly narrowed"); _Yoder,_ 406 U.S., at 221, 92 S.Ct., at 1536 ("Where fundamental claims of religious freedom are at stake," the Court will not accept a State's "sweeping claim" that its interest in compulsory education is compelling; despite the validity of this interest "in the generality of cases, we must searchingly examine the interests that the State seeks to promote . . . and the impediment to those objectives that would flow from recognizing the claimed Amish exemption"). Failure to reduce the competing interests to the same plane of generality tends to distort the weighing process in the State's favor. See Clark, Guidelines for the Free Exercise Clause, 83 Harv.L.Rev. 327, 330-331 (1969) ("The purpose of almost any law can be traced back to one or another of the fundamental concerns of government: public health and safety, public peace and order, defense, revenue. To measure an individual interest directly against one of these rarified values inevitably makes the individual interest appear the less significant"); Pound, A Survey of Social Interests, 57 Harv.L.Rev. 1, 2 (1943) ("When it comes to weighing or valuing claims or demands with respect to other claims or demands, we must be careful to compare them on the same plane . . . [or else] we may decide the question in advance in our very way of putting it").

65

The State's interest in enforcing its prohibition, in order to be sufficiently
compelling to outweigh a free exercise claim, cannot be merely abstract or
symbolic. The State cannot plausibly assert that unbending application of a
criminal prohibition is essential to fulfill any compelling interest, if it
does not, in fact, attempt to enforce that prohibition. In this case, the
State actually has not evinced any concrete interest in enforcing its drug
laws against religious users of peyote. Oregon has never sought to prosecute
respondents, and does not claim that it has made significant enforcement
efforts against other religious users of peyote.3 The State's asserted
interest thus amounts only to the symbolic preservation of an unenforced
prohibition. But a government interest in "symbolism, even symbolism for so
worthy a cause as the abolition of unlawful drugs," _Treasury Employees v. Von
Raab,_ 489 U.S. 656, 687, 109 S.Ct. 1384, 1402, 103 L.Ed.2d 685 (1989)
(SCALIA, J., dissenting), cannot suffice to abrogate the constitutional rights
of individuals.

66

Similarly, this Court's prior decisions have not allowed a government to rely
on mere speculation about potential harms, but have demanded evidentiary
support for a refusal to allow a religious exception. See _Thomas,_ 450 U.S.,
at 719, 101 S.Ct., at 1432 (rejecting State's reasons for refusing religious
exemption, for lack of "evidence in the record"); _Yoder,_ 406 U.S., at
224-229, 92 S.Ct., at 1537-38 (rejecting State's argument concerning the
dangers of a religious exemption as speculative, and unsupported by the
record); _Sherbert v. Verner,_ 374 U.S. 398, 407, 83 S.Ct. 1790, 1795, 10
L.Ed.2d 965 (1963) ("[T]here is no proof whatever to warrant such fears . . .
as those which the [State] now advance[s]"). In this case, the State's
justification for refusing to recognize an exception to its criminal laws for
religious peyote use is entirely speculative.

67

The State proclaims an interest in protecting the health and safety of its
citizens from the dangers of unlawful drugs. It offers, however, no evidence
that the religious use of peyote has ever harmed anyone.4 The factual findings
of other courts cast doubt on the State's assumption that religious use of
peyote is harmful. See _State v. Whittingham,_ 19 Ariz.App. 27, 30, 504 P.2d
950, 953 (1973) ("[T]he State failed to prove that the quantities of peyote
used in the sacraments of the Native American Church are sufficiently harmful
to the health and welfare of the participants so as to permit a legitimate
intrusion under the State's police power"); _People v. Woody,_ 61 Cal.2d 716,
722-723, 40 Cal.Rptr. 69, 74, 394 P.2d 813, 818 (1964) ("[A]s the Attorney
General . . . admits, . . . the opinion of scientists and other experts is
'that peyote . . . works no permanent deleterious injury to the Indian' ").

68

The fact that peyote is classified as a Schedule I controlled substance does
not, by itself, show that any and all uses of peyote, in any circumstance, are
inherently harmful and dangerous. The Federal Government, which created the
classifications of unlawful drugs from which Oregon's drug laws are derived,
apparently does not find peyote so dangerous as to preclude an exemption for
religious use.5 Moreover, other Schedule I drugs have lawful uses. See _Olsen
v. Drug Enforcement Admin.,_ 279 U.S.App.D.C. 1, 6, n. 4, 878 F.2d 1458, 1463,
n. 4 (medical and research uses of marijuana).

69

The carefully circumscribed ritual context in which respondents used peyote is
far removed from the irresponsible and unrestricted recreational use of
unlawful drugs.6 The Native American Church's internal restrictions on, and
supervision of, its members' use of peyote substantially obviate the State's
health and safety concerns. See _Olsen, id.,_ at 10, 878 F.2d, at 1467 (" 'The
Administrator [of the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)] finds that . . .
the Native American Church's use of peyote is isolated to specific ceremonial
occasions,' " and so " 'an accommodation can be made for a religious
organization which uses peyote in circumscribed ceremonies' " (quoting DEA
Final Order)); _id.,_ at 7, 878 F.2d, at 1464 ("[F]or members of the Native
American Church, use of peyote outside the ritual is sacrilegious"); _Woody,_
61 Cal.2d, at 721, 394 P.2d, at 817 ("[T]o use peyote for nonreligious
purposes is sacrilegious"); R. Julien, A Primer of Drug Action 148 (3d ed.
1981) ("[P]eyote is seldom abused by members of the Native American Church");
Slotkin, The Peyote Way, in Teachings from the American Earth 96, 104 (D.
Tedlock & B. Tedlock eds. 1975) ("[T]he Native American Church . . . refuses
to permit the presence of curiosity seekers at its rites, and vigorously
opposes the sale or use of Peyote for non-sacramental purposes"); Bergman,
Navajo Peyote Use: Its Apparent Safety, 128 Am.J. Psychiatry 695 (1971)
(Bergman).7

70

Moreover, just as in _Yoder,_ the values and interests of those seeking a
religious exemption in this case are congruent, to a great degree, with those
the State seeks to promote through its drug laws. See _Yoder,_ 406 U.S., at
224, 228-229, 92 S.Ct., at 1540 (since the Amish accept formal schooling up to
8th grade, and then provide "ideal" vocational education, State's interest in
enforcing its law against the Amish is "less substantial than . . . for
children generally"); _id.,_ at 238, 92 S.Ct., at 1544 (WHITE, J.,
concurring). Not only does the church's doctrine forbid nonreligious use of
peyote; it also generally advocates self-reliance, familial responsibility,
and abstinence from alcohol. See Brief for Association on American Indian
Affairs et al. as _Amici Curiae_ 33-34 (the church's "ethical code" has four
parts: brotherly love, care of family, self-reliance, and avoidance of alcohol
(quoting from the church membership card)); _Olsen,_ 279 U.S.App.D.C., at 7,
878 F.2d, at 1464 (the Native American Church, "for all purposes other than
the special, stylized ceremony, reinforced the state's prohibition"); Woody,
61 Cal.2d, at 721-722, n. 3, 394 P.2d, at 818, n. 3 ("[M]ost anthropological
authorities hold Peyotism to be a positive, rather than negative, force in the
lives of its adherents . . . the church forbids the use of alcohol . . .").
There is considerable evidence that the spiritual and social support provided
by the church has been effective in combating the tragic effects of alcoholism
on the Native American population. Two noted experts on peyotism, Dr. Omer C.
Stewart and Dr. Robert Bergman, testified by affidavit to this effect on
behalf of respondent Smith before the Employment Appeal Board. Smith Tr., Exh.
7; see also E. Anderson, Peyote: The Divine Cactus 165-166 (1980) (research by
Dr. Bergman suggests "that the religious use of peyote seemed to be directed
in an ego-strengthening direction with an emphasis on interpersonal
relationships where each individual is assured of his own significance as well
as the support of the group"; many people have " 'come through difficult
crises with the help of this religion. . . . It provides real help in seeing
themselves not as people whose place and way in the world is gone, but as
people whose way can be strong enough to change and meet new challenges' "
(quoting Bergman 698)); Pascarosa & Futterman, Ethnopsychedelic Therapy for
Alcoholics: Observations in the Peyote Ritual of the Native American Church, 8
J. of Psychedelic Drugs, No. 3, p. 215 (1976) (religious peyote use has been
helpful in overcoming alcoholism); Albaugh & Anderson, Peyote in the Treatment
of Alcoholism among American Indians, 131 Am.J. Psychiatry 1247, 1249 (1974)
("[T]he philosophy, teachings, and format of the [Native American Church] can
be of great benefit to the Indian alcoholic"); see generally O. Stewart,
Peyote Religion 75 _et seq._ (1987) (noting frequent observations, across many
tribes and periods in history, of correlation between peyotist religion and
abstinence from alcohol). Far from promoting the lawless and irresponsible use
of drugs, Native American Church members' spiritual code exemplifies values
that Oregon's drug laws are presumably intended to foster.

71

The State also seeks to support its refusal to make an exception for religious
use of peyote by invoking its interest in abolishing drug trafficking. There
is, however, practically no illegal traffic in peyote. See _Olsen,_ 279
U.S.App.D.C., at 6, 7, 878 F.2d, at 1463, 1467 (quoting DEA Final Order to the
effect that total amount of peyote seized and analyzed by federal authorities
between 1980 and 1987 was 19.4 pounds; in contrast, total amount of marijuana
seized during that period was over 15 million pounds). Also, the availability
of peyote for religious use, even if Oregon were to allow an exemption from
its criminal laws, would still be strictly controlled by federal regulations,
see 21 U.S.C. §§ 821-823 (registration requirements for distribution of
controlled substances); 21 CFR § 1307.31 (1989) (distribution of peyote to
Native American Church subject to registration requirements), and by the State
of Texas, the only State in which peyote grows in significant quantities. See
Texas Health & Safety Code Ann. § 481.111 (1990 pamphlet); Texas Admin.Code,
Tit. 37, pt. 1, ch. 13, Controlled Substances Regulations, §§ 13.35-13.41
(1989); _Woody,_ 61 Cal.2d, at 720, 394 P.2d, at 816 (peyote is "found in the
Rio Grande Valley of Texas and northern Mexico"). Peyote simply is not a
popular drug; its distribution for use in religious rituals has nothing to do
with the vast and violent traffic in illegal narcotics that plagues this
country.

72

Finally, the State argues that granting an exception for religious peyote use
would erode its interest in the uniform, fair, and certain enforcement of its
drug laws. The State fears that, if it grants an exemption for religious
peyote use, a flood of other claims to religious exemptions will follow. It
would then be placed in a dilemma, it says, between allowing a patchwork of
exemptions that would hinder its law enforcement efforts, and risking a
violation of the Establishment Clause by arbitrarily limiting its religious
exemptions. This argument, however, could be made in almost any free exercise
case. See Lupu, Where Rights Begin: The Problem of Burdens on the Free
Exercise of Religion, 102 Harv.L.Rev. 933, 947 (1989) ("Behind every free
exercise claim is a spectral march; grant this one, a voice whispers to each
judge, and you will be confronted with an endless chain of exemption demands
from religious deviants of every stripe"). This Court, however, consistently
has rejected similar arguments in past free exercise cases, and it should do
so here as well. See _Frazee v. Illinois Dept. of Employment Security,_ 489
U.S. 829, 835, 109 S.Ct. 1514, 1518, 103 L.Ed.2d 914 (1989) (rejecting State's
speculation concerning cumulative effect of many similar claims); _Thomas,_
450 U.S., at 719, 101 S.Ct., at 1432 (same); _Sherbert,_ 374 U.S., at 407, 83
S.Ct., at 1795.

73

The State's apprehension of a flood of other religious claims is purely
speculative. Almost half the States, and the Federal Government, have
maintained an exemption for religious peyote use for many years, and
apparently have not found themselves overwhelmed by claims to other religious
exemptions.8 Allowing an exemption for religious peyote use would not
necessarily oblige the State to grant a similar exemption to other religious
groups. The unusual circumstances that make the religious use of peyote
compatible with the State's interests in health and safety and in preventing
drug trafficking would not apply to other religious claims. Some religions,
for example, might not restrict drug use to a limited ceremonial context, as
does the Native American Church. See, _e.g., Olsen,_ 279 U.S.App.D.C., at 7,
878 F.2d, at 1464 ("[T]he Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church . . . teaches that
marijuana is properly smoked 'continually all day' "). Some religious claims,
see n. 8, _supra,_ involve drugs such as marijuana and heroin, in which there
is significant illegal traffic, with its attendant greed and violence, so that
it would be difficult to grant a religious exemption without seriously
compromising law enforcement efforts.9 That the State might grant an exemption
for religious peyote use, but deny other religious claims arising in different
circumstances, would not violate the Establishment Clause. Though the State
must treat all religions equally, and not favor one over another, this
obligation is fulfilled by the uniform application of the "compelling
interest" _test_ to all free exercise claims, not by reaching uniform
_results_ as to all claims. A showing that religious peyote use does not
unduly interfere with the State's interests is "one that probably few other
religious groups or sects could make," _Yoder,_ 406 U.S., at 236, 92 S.Ct., at
1543; this does not mean that an exemption limited to peyote use is tantamount
to an establishment of religion. See _Hobbie v. Unemployment Appeals Comm'n of
Fla.,_ 480 U.S. 136, 144-145, 107 S.Ct. 1046, 1051, 94 L.Ed.2d 190 (1987)
("[T]he government may (and sometimes must) accommodate religious practices
and . . . may do so without violating the Establishment Clause"); _Yoder,_ 406
U.S., at 220-221, 92 S.Ct., at 1536 ("Court must not ignore the danger that an
exception from a general [law] . . . may run afoul of the Establishment
Clause, but that danger cannot be allowed to prevent any exception no matter
how vital it may be to the protection of values promoted by the right of free
exercise"); _id.,_ at 234, n. 22, 92 S.Ct., at 1542, n. 22.

II

74

Finally, although I agree with Justice O'CONNOR that courts should refrain
from delving into questions whether, as a matter of religious doctrine, a
particular practice is "central" to the religion, _ante,_ at 906-907, I do not
think this means that the courts must turn a blind eye to the severe impact of
a State's restrictions on the adherents of a minority religion. Cf. _Yoder,_
406 U.S., at 219, 92 S.Ct., at 1535 (since "education is inseparable from and
a part of the basic tenets of their religion . . . [, just as] baptism, the
confessional, or a sabbath may be for others," enforcement of State's
compulsory education law would "gravely endanger if not destroy the free
exercise of respondents' religious beliefs").

75

Respondents believe, and their sincerity has _never_ been at issue, that the
peyote plant embodies their deity, and eating it is an act of worship and
communion. Without peyote, they could not enact the essential ritual of their
religion. See Brief for Association on American Indian Affairs et al. as
_Amici Curiae_ 5-6 ("To the members, peyote is consecrated with powers to heal
body, mind and spirit. It is a teacher; it teaches the way to spiritual life
through living in harmony and balance with the forces of the Creation. The
rituals are an integral part of the life process. They embody a form of
worship in which the sacrament Peyote is the means for communicating with the
Great Spirit"). See also O. Stewart, Peyote Religion 327-330 (1987)
(description of peyote ritual); T. Hillerman, People of Darkness 153 (1980)
(description of Navajo peyote ritual).

76

If Oregon can constitutionally prosecute them for this act of worship, they,
like the Amish, may be "forced to migrate to some other and more tolerant
region." _Yoder,_ 406 U.S., at 218, 92 S.Ct., at 1534-1535. This potentially
devastating impact must be viewed in light of the federal policy--reached in
reaction to many years of religious persecution and intolerance--of protecting
the religious freedom of Native Americans. See American Indian Religious
Freedom Act, 92 Stat. 469, 42 U.S.C. § 1996 (1982 ed.) ("[I]t shall be the
policy of the United States to protect and preserve for American Indians their
inherent right of freedom to believe, express, and exercise the traditional
religions . . ., including but not limited to access to sites, use and
possession of sacred objects, and the freedom to worship through ceremonials
and traditional rites").10 Congress recognized that certain substances, such
as peyote, "have religious significance because they are sacred, they have
power, they heal, they are necessary to the exercise of the rites of the
religion, they are necessary to the cultural integrity of the tribe, and,
therefore, religious survival." H.R.Rep. No. 95-1308, p. 2 (1978), U.S.Code
Cong. & Admin.News 1978, pp. 1262, 1263.

77

The American Indian Religious Freedom Act, in itself, may not create rights
enforceable against government action restricting religious freedom, but this
Court must scrupulously apply its free exercise analysis to the religious
claims of Native Americans, however unorthodox they may be. Otherwise, both
the First Amendment and the stated policy of Congress will offer to Native
Americans merely an unfulfilled and hollow promise.

III

78

For these reasons, I conclude that Oregon's interest in enforcing its drug
laws against religious use of peyote is not sufficiently compelling to
outweigh respondents' right to the free exercise of their religion. Since the
State could not constitutionally enforce its criminal prohibition against
respondents, the interests underlying the State's drug laws cannot justify its
denial of unemployment benefits. Absent such justification, the State's
regulatory interest in denying benefits for religiously motivated
"misconduct," see _ante,_ at 874, is indistinguishable from the state
interests this Court has rejected in _Frazee, Hobbie, Thomas,_ and _Sherbert._
The State of Oregon cannot, consistently with the Free Exercise Clause, deny
respondents unemployment benefits.

79

I dissent.

1

Both lines of cases have specifically adverted to the non-free-exercise
principle involved. _Cantwell,_ for example, observed that "[t]he fundamental
law declares the interest of the United States that the free exercise of
religion be not prohibited and that freedom to communicate information and
opinion be not abridged." 310 U.S., at 307, 60 S.Ct., at 905. _Murdock_ said:

"We do not mean to say that religious groups and the press are free from all
financial burdens of government. . . . We have here something quite different,
for example, from a tax on the income of one who engages in religious
activities or a tax on property used or employed in connection with those
activities. It is one thing to impose a tax on the income or property of a
preacher. It is quite another thing to exact a tax from him for the privilege
of delivering a sermon. . . . Those who can deprive religious groups of their
colporteurs can take from them a part of the vital power of the press which
has survived from the Reformation." 319 U.S., at 112, 63 S.Ct., at 874.

_Yoder_ said that "the Court's holding in _Pierce_ stands as a charter of the
rights of parents to direct the religious upbringing of their children. And,
when the interests of parenthood are combined with a free exercise claim of
the nature revealed by this record, more than merely a 'reasonable relation to
some purpose within the competency of the State' is required to sustain the
validity of the State's requirement under the First Amendment." 406 U.S., at
233, 92 S.Ct., at 1542.

2

Justice O'CONNOR seeks to distinguish _Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery
Protective Assn.,_ 485 U.S. 439, 108 S.Ct. 1319, 99 L.Ed.2d 534 (1988), and
_Bowen v. Roy,_ 476 U.S. 693, 106 S.Ct. 2147, 90 L.Ed.2d 735 (1986), on the
ground that those cases involved the government's conduct of "its own internal
affairs," which is different because, as Justice Douglas said in _Sherbert,_ "
'the Free Exercise Clause is written in terms of what the government cannot do
to the individual, not in terms of what the individual can exact from the
government.' " _Post,_ at 900 (O'CONNOR, J., concurring in judgment), quoting
_Sherbert v. Verner,_ 374 U.S. 398, 412, 83 S.Ct. 1790, 1798, 10 L.Ed.2d 965
(1963) (Douglas, J., concurring). But since Justice Douglas voted with the
majority in _Sherbert,_ that quote obviously envisioned that what "the
government cannot do to the individual" includes not just the prohibition of
an individual's freedom of action through criminal laws but also the running
of its programs (in _Sherbert,_ state unemployment compensation) in such
fashion as to harm the individual's religious interests. Moreover, it is hard
to see any reason in principle or practicality why the government should have
to tailor its health and safety laws to conform to the diversity of religious
belief, but should not have to tailor its management of public lands, _Lyng,
supra,_ or its administration of welfare programs, _Roy, supra._

3

Justice O'CONNOR suggests that "[t]here is nothing talismanic about neutral
laws of general applicability," and that all laws burdening religious
practices should be subject to compelling-interest scrutiny because "the First
Amendment unequivocally makes freedom of religion, like freedom from race
discrimination and freedom of speech, a 'constitutional nor[m],' not an
'anomaly.' " _Post,_ at 901 (opinion concurring in judgment). But this
comparison with other fields supports, rather than undermines, the conclusion
we draw today. Just as we subject to the most exacting scrutiny laws that make
classifications based on race, see _Palmore v. Sidoti,_ 466 U.S. 429, 104
S.Ct. 1879, 80 L.Ed.2d 421 (1984), or on the content of speech, see _Sable
Communications of California v. FCC,_ 492 U.S. 115, 109 S.Ct. 2829, 106
L.Ed.2d 93 (1989), so too we strictly scrutinize governmental classifications
based on religion, see _McDaniel v. Paty,_ 435 U.S. 618, 98 S.Ct. 1322, 55
L.Ed.2d 593 (1978); see also _Torcaso v. Watkins,_ 367 U.S. 488, 81 S.Ct.
1680, 6 L.Ed.2d 982 (1961). But we have held that race-neutral laws that have
the _effect_ of disproportionately disadvantaging a particular racial group do
not thereby become subject to compelling-interest analysis under the Equal
Protection Clause, see _Washington v. Davis,_ 426 U.S. 229, 96 S.Ct. 2040, 48
L.Ed.2d 597 (1976) (police employment examination); and we have held that
generally applicable laws unconcerned with regulating speech that have the
_effect_ of interfering with speech do not thereby become subject to
compelling-interest analysis under the First Amendment, see _Citizen
Publishing Co. v. United States,_ 394 U.S. 131, 139, 89 S.Ct. 927, 22 L.Ed.2d
148 (1969) (antitrust laws). Our conclusion that generally applicable,
religion-neutral laws that have the effect of burdening a particular religious
practice need not be justified by a compelling governmental interest is the
only approach compatible with these precedents.

4

While arguing that we should apply the compelling interest test in this case,
Justice O'CONNOR nonetheless agrees that "our determination of the
constitutionality of Oregon's general criminal prohibition cannot, and should
not, turn on the centrality of the particular religious practice at issue,"
_post,_ at 906-907 (opinion concurring in judgment). This means, presumably,
that compelling interest scrutiny must be applied to generally applicable laws
that regulate or prohibit _any_ religiously motivated activity, no matter how
unimportant to the claimant's religion. Earlier in her opinion, however,
Justice O'CONNOR appears to contradict this, saying that the proper approach
is "to determine whether the burden on the specific plaintiffs before us is
constitutionally significant and whether the particular criminal interest
asserted by the State before us is compelling." _Post,_ at 899.
"Constitutionally significant burden" would seem to be "centrality" under
another name. In any case, dispensing with a "centrality" inquiry is utterly
unworkable. It would require, for example, the same degree of "compelling
state interest" to impede the practice of throwing rice at church weddings as
to impede the practice of getting married in church. There is no way out of
the difficulty that, if general laws are to be subjected to a "religious
practice" exception, _both_ the importance of the law at issue _and_ the
centrality of the practice at issue must reasonably be considered.

Nor is this difficulty avoided by Justice BLACKMUN's assertion that "although
. . . courts should refrain from delving into questions whether, as a matter
of religious doctrine, a particular practice is 'central' to the religion, . .
. I do not think this means that the courts must turn a blind eye to the
severe impact of a State's restrictions on the adherents of a minority
religion." _Post,_ at 919 (dissenting opinion). As Justice BLACKMUN's opinion
proceeds to make clear, inquiry into "severe impact" is no different from
inquiry into centrality. He has merely substituted for the question "How
important is X to the religious adherent?" the question "How great will be the
harm to the religious adherent if X is taken away?" There is no material
difference.

5

Justice O'CONNOR contends that the "parade of horribles" in the text only
"demonstrates . . . that courts have been quite capable of . . . strik[ing]
sensible balances between religious liberty and competing state interests."
_Post,_ at 902 (opinion concurring in judgment). But the cases we cite have
struck "sensible balances" only because they have all applied the general
laws, despite the claims for religious exemption. In any event, Justice
O'CONNOR mistakes the purpose of our parade: it is not to suggest that courts
would necessarily permit harmful exemptions from these laws (though they
might), but to suggest that courts would constantly be in the business of
determining whether the "severe impact" of various laws on religious practice
(to use Justice BLACKMUN's terminology _post,_ at 919) or the
"constitutiona[l] significan[ce]" of the "burden on the specific plaintiffs"
(to use Justice O'CONNOR's terminology _post,_ at 899) suffices to permit us
to confer an exemption. It is a parade of horribles because it is horrible to
contemplate that federal judges will regularly balance against the importance
of general laws the significance of religious practice.

*

Although Justice BRENNAN, Justice MARSHALL, and Justice BLACKMUN join Parts I
and II of this opinion, they do not concur in the judgment.

1

See _Hernandez v. Commissioner,_ 490 U.S. 680, 699, 109 S.Ct. 2136, 2149, 104
L.Ed.2d 766 (1989) ("The free exercise inquiry asks whether government has
placed a substantial burden on the observation of a central religious belief
or practice and, if so, whether a compelling governmental interest justifies
the burden"); _Hobbie v. Unemployment Appeals Comm'n of Fla.,_ 480 U.S. 136,
141, 107 S.Ct. 1046, 1049, 94 L.Ed.2d 190 (1987) (state laws burdening
religions "must be subjected to strict scrutiny and could be justified only by
proof by the State of a compelling interest"); _Bowen v. Roy,_ 476 U.S. 693,
732, 106 S.Ct. 2147, 2169, 90 L.Ed.2d 735 (1986) (O'CONNOR, J., concurring in
part and dissenting in part) ("Our precedents have long required the
Government to show that a compelling state interest is served by its refusal
to grant a religious exemption"); _United States v. Lee,_ 455 U.S. 252,
257-258, 102 S.Ct. 1051, 1055, 71 L.Ed.2d 127 (1982) ("The state may justify a
limitation on religious liberty by showing that it is essential to accomplish
an overriding governmental interest"); _Thomas v. Review Bd. of Indiana
Employment Security Div.,_ 450 U.S. 707, 718, 101 S.Ct. 1425, 1432, 67 L.Ed.2d
624 (1981) ("The state may justify an inroad on religious liberty by showing
that it is the least restrictive means of achieving some compelling state
interest"); _Wisconsin v. Yoder,_ 406 U.S. 205, 215, 92 S.Ct. 1526, 1533, 32
L.Ed.2d 15 (1972) ("[O]nly those interests of the highest order and those not
otherwise served can overbalance legitimate claims to the free exercise of
religion"); _Sherbert v. Verner,_ 374 U.S. 398, 406, 83 S.Ct. 1790, 1795, 10
L.Ed.2d 965 (1963) (question is "whether some compelling state interest . . .
justifies the substantial infringement of appellant's First Amendment right").

2

I reluctantly agree that, in light of this Court's decision in _Employment
Division, Dept. of Human Resources of Ore. v. Smith,_ 485 U.S. 660, 108 S.Ct.
1444, 99 L.Ed.2d 753 (1988), the question on which certiorari was granted is
properly presented in this case. I have grave doubts, however, as to the
wisdom or propriety of deciding the constitutionality of a criminal
prohibition which the State has not sought to enforce, which the State did not
rely on in defending its denial of unemployment benefits before the state
courts, and which the Oregon courts could, on remand, either invalidate on
state constitutional grounds, or conclude that it remains irrelevant to
Oregon's interest in administering its unemployment benefits program.

It is surprising, to say the least, that this Court which so often prides
itself about principles of judicial restraint and reduction of federal control
over matters of state law would stretch its jurisdiction to the limit in order
to reach, in this abstract setting, the constitutionality of Oregon's criminal
prohibition of peyote use.

3

The only reported case in which the State of Oregon has sought to prosecute a
person for religious peyote use is _State v. Soto,_ 21 Ore.App. 794, 537 P.2d
142 (1975), cert. denied, 424 U.S. 955, 96 S.Ct. 1431, 47 L.Ed.2d 361 (1976).

4

This dearth of evidence is not surprising, since the State never asserted this
health and safety interest before the Oregon courts; thus, there was no
opportunity for factfinding concerning the alleged dangers of peyote use. What
has now become the State's principal argument for its view that the criminal
prohibition is enforceable against religious use of peyote rests on no
evidentiary foundation at all.

5

See 21 CFR § 1307.31 (1989) ("The listing of peyote as a controlled substance
in Schedule I does not apply to the nondrug use of peyote in bona fide
religious ceremonies of the Native American Church, and members of the Native
American Church so using peyote are exempt from registration. Any person who
manufactures peyote for or distributes peyote to the Native American Church,
however, is required to obtain registration annually and to comply with all
other requirements of law"); see _Olsen v. Drug Enforcement Admin.,_ 279
U.S.App.D.C. 1, 6-7, 878 F.2d 1458, 1463-1464 (1989) (explaining DEA's
rationale for the exception).

Moreover, 23 States, including many that have significant Native American
populations, have statutory or judicially crafted exemptions in their drug
laws for religious use of peyote. See 307 Ore. 68, 73, n. 2, 763 P.2d 146,
148, n. 2 (1988) (case below). Although this does not prove that Oregon must
have such an exception too, it is significant that these States, and the
Federal Government, all find their (presumably compelling) interests in
controlling the use of dangerous drugs compatible with an exemption for
religious use of peyote. Cf. _Boos v. Barry,_ 485 U.S. 312, 329, 108 S.Ct.
1157, 1168, 99 L.Ed.2d 333 (1988) (finding that an ordinance restricting
picketing near a foreign embassy was not the least restrictive means of
serving the asserted government interest; existence of an analogous, but more
narrowly drawn, federal statute showed that "a less restrictive alternative is
readily available").

6

In this respect, respondents' use of peyote seems closely analogous to the
sacramental use of wine by the Roman Catholic Church. During Prohibition, the
Federal Government exempted such use of wine from its general ban on
possession and use of alcohol. See National Prohibition Act, Title II, § 3, 41
Stat. 308. However compelling the Government's then general interest in
prohibiting the use of alcohol may have been, it could not plausibly have
asserted an interest sufficiently compelling to outweigh Catholics' right to
take communion.

7

The use of peyote is, to some degree, self-limiting. The peyote plant is
extremely bitter, and eating it is an unpleasant experience, which would tend
to discourage casual or recreational use. See _State v. Whittingham,_ 19
Ariz.App. 27, 30, 504 P.2d 950, 953 (1973) (" '[P]eyote can cause vomiting by
reason of its bitter taste' "); E. Anderson, Peyote: The Divine Cactus 161
(1980) ("[T]he eating of peyote usually is a difficult ordeal in that nausea
and other unpleasant physical manifestations occur regularly. Repeated use is
likely, therefore, only if one is a serious researcher or is devoutly involved
in taking peyote as part of a religious ceremony"); Slotkin, The Peyote Way,
in Teachings from the American Earth 96, 98 (D. Tedlock & B. Tedlock eds.
1975) ("[M]any find it bitter, inducing indigestion or nausea").

8

Over the years, various sects have raised free exercise claims regarding drug
use. In no reported case, except those involving claims of religious peyote
use, has the claimant prevailed. See, _e.g., Olsen v. Iowa,_ 808 F.2d 652 (CA8
1986) (marijuana use by Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church); _United States v.
Rush,_ 738 F.2d 497 (CA1 1984) (same), cert. denied, 470 U.S. 1004, 105 S.Ct.
1355, 84 L.Ed.2d 378 (1985); _United States v. Middleton,_ 690 F.2d 820 (CA11
1982) (same), cert. denied, 460 U.S. 1051, 103 S.Ct. 1497, 75 L.Ed.2d 929
(1983) (same); _United States v. Hudson,_ 431 F.2d 468 (CA5 1970) (marijuana
and heroin use by Moslems), cert. denied, 400 U.S. 1011, 91 S.Ct. 575, 577, 27
L.Ed.2d 624 (1971); _Leary v. United States,_ 383 F.2d 851 (CA5 1967)
(marijuana use by Hindu), rev'd on other grounds, 395 U.S. 6, 89 S.Ct. 1532,
23 L.Ed.2d 57 (1969); _Commonwealth v. Nissenbaum,_ 404 Mass. 575, 536 N.E.2d
592 (1989) (marijuana use by Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church); _State v. Blake,_
5 Haw.App. 411, 695 P.2d 336 (1985) (marijuana use in practice of Hindu
Tantrism); _Whyte v. United States,_ 471 A.2d 1018 (D.C.App.1984) (marijuana
use by Rastafarian); _State v. Rocheleau,_ 142 Vt. 61, 451 A.2d 1144 (1982)
(marijuana use by Tantric Buddhist); _State v. Brashear,_ 92 N.M. 622, 593
P.2d 63 (1979) (marijuana use by nondenominational Christian); _State v.
Randall,_ 540 S.W.2d 156 (Mo.App.1976) (marijuana, LSD, and hashish use by
Aquarian Brotherhood Church). See generally Annotation, Free Exercise of
Religion as Defense to Prosecution for Narcotic or Psychedelic Drug Offense,
35 A.L.R.3d 939 (1971 and Supp.1989).

9

Thus, this case is distinguishable from _United States v. Lee,_ 455 U.S. 252,
102 S.Ct. 1051, 71 L.Ed.2d 127 (1982), in which the Court concluded that there
was "no principled way" to distinguish other exemption claims, and the "tax
system could not function if denominations were allowed to challenge the tax
system because tax payments were spent in a manner that violates their
religious belief." _Id.,_ at 260, 102 S.Ct., at 1056.

10

See Federal Agencies Task Force, Report to Congress on American Indian
Religious Freedom Act of 1978, pp. 1-8 (Aug. 1979) (history of religious
persecution); Barsh, The Illusion of Religious Freedom for Indigenous
Americans, 65 Ore.L.Rev. 363, 369-374 (1986).

Indeed, Oregon's attitude toward respondents' religious peyote use harkens
back to the repressive federal policies pursued a century ago:

"In the government's view, traditional practices were not only morally
degrading, but unhealthy. 'Indians are fond of gatherings of every
description,' a 1913 public health study complained, advocating the
restriction of dances and 'sings' to stem contagious diseases. In 1921,
Commissioner of Indian Affairs Charles Burke reminded his staff to punish any
Indian engaged in 'any dance which involves . . . the reckless giving away of
property . . . frequent or prolonged periods of celebration . . . in fact, any
disorderly or plainly excessive performance that promotes superstitious
cruelty, licentiousness, idleness, danger to health, and shiftless
indifference to family welfare.' Two years later, he forbid Indians under the
age of 50 from participating in any dances of any kind, and directed federal
employees 'to educate public opinion' against them." _Id.,_ at 370-371
(footnotes omitted).

