# Fulton v. Philadelphia 141 S.Ct. 1868 (2021)ROBERTS, C. J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which BREYER, SOTOMAYOR, KAGAN, KAVANAUGH, and BARRETT, JJ., joined. BARRETT, J., filed a concurring opinion, in which KAVANAUGH, J., joined, and in which BREYER, J., joined as to all but the first paragraph. ALITO, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which THOMAS and GORSUCH, JJ., joined. GORSUCH, J., filed an opinion concurring in the judgment, in which THOMAS and ALITO, JJ., joined.**Chief Justice ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the Court.** Catholic Social Services is a foster care agency in Philadelphia. The City stopped referring children to CSS upon discovering that the agency would not certify same-sex couples to be foster parents due to its religious beliefs about marriage. The City will renew its foster care contract with CSS only if the agency agrees to certify same-sex couples. The question presented is whether the actions of Philadelphia violate the First Amendment.  The Philadelphia foster care system depends on cooperation between the City and private foster agencies like CSS. When children cannot remain in their homes, the City's Department of Human Services assumes custody of them. The Department enters standard annual contracts with private foster agencies to place some of those children with foster families. The placement process begins with review of prospective foster families. Pennsylvania law gives the authority to certify foster families to state-licensed foster agencies like CSS.  Before certifying a family, an agency must conduct a home study during which it considers statutory criteria including the family's "ability to provide care, nurturing and supervision to children," "[e]xisting family relationships," and ability "to work in partnership" with a foster agency. The agency must decide whether to "approve, disapprove or provisionally approve the foster family." When the Department seeks to place a child with a foster family, it sends its contracted agencies a request, known as a referral. The agencies report whether any of their certified families are available, and the Department places the child with what it regards as the most suitable family. The agency continues to support the family throughout the placement. The religious views of CSS inform its work in this system. CSS believes that "marriage is a sacred bond between a man and a woman." Because the agency understands the certification of prospective foster families to be an endorsement of their relationships, it will not certify unmarried couples-regardless of their sexual orientation-or same-sex married couples. CSS does not object to certifying gay or lesbian individuals as single foster parents or to placing gay and lesbian children. No same-sex couple has ever sought certification from CSS. If one did, CSS would direct the couple to one of the more than 20 other agencies in the City, all of which currently certify same-sex couples. For over 50 years, CSS successfully contracted with the City to provide foster care services while holding to these beliefs. But things changed in 2018. After receiving a complaint about a different agency, a newspaper ran a story in which a spokesman for the Archdiocese of Philadelphia stated that CSS would not be able to consider prospective foster parents in same-sex marriages. The City Council called for an investigation, saying that the City had "laws in place to protect its people from discrimination that occurs under the guise of religious freedom." The Philadelphia Commission on Human Relations launched an inquiry. And the Commissioner of the Department of Human Services held a meeting with the leadership of CSS. She remarked that "things have changed since 100 years ago," and "it would be great if we followed the teachings of Pope Francis, the voice of the Catholic Church."  Immediately after the meeting, the Department informed CSS that it would no longer refer children to the agency. The City later explained that the refusal of CSS to certify same-sex couples violated a non-discrimination provision in its contract with the City as well as the non-discrimination requirements of the citywide Fair Practices Ordinance. The City stated that it would not enter a full foster care contract with CSS in the future unless the agency agreed to certify same-sex couples. The Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment, applicable to the States under the Fourteenth Amendment, provides that "Congress shall make no law ... prohibiting the free exercise" of religion. As an initial matter, it is plain that the City's actions have burdened CSS's religious exercise by putting it to the choice of curtailing its mission or approving relationships inconsistent with its beliefs. The City disagrees. In its view, certification reflects only that foster parents satisfy the statutory criteria, not that the agency endorses their relationships. But CSS believes that certification is tantamount to endorsement. And "religious beliefs need not be acceptable, logical, consistent, or comprehensible to others in order to merit First Amendment protection."  Our task is to decide whether the burden the City has placed on the religious exercise of CSS is constitutionally permissible. Smith held that laws incidentally burdening religion are ordinarily not subject to strict scrutiny under the Free Exercise Clause so long as they are neutral and generally applicable.  CSS urges us to overrule Smith, and the concurrences in the judgment argue in favor of doing so. But we need not revisit that decision here. This case falls outside Smith because the City has burdened the religious exercise of CSS through policies that do not meet the requirement of being neutral and generally applicable. See Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. Hialeah. Government fails to act neutrally when it proceeds in a manner intolerant of religious beliefs or restricts practices because of their religious nature. CSS points to evidence in the record that it believes demonstrates that the City has transgressed this neutrality standard, but we find it more straightforward to resolve this case under the rubric of general applicability. A law is not generally applicable if it "invite[s]" the government to consider the particular reasons for a person's conduct by providing " 'a mechanism for individualized exemptions.' "  For example, in Sherbert v. Verner, a Seventh-day Adventist was fired because she would not work on Saturdays. Unable to find a job that would allow her to keep the Sabbath as her faith required, she applied for unemployment benefits.  The State denied her application under a law prohibiting eligibility to claimants who had "failed, without good cause ... to accept available suitable work."  We held that the denial infringed her free exercise rights and could be justified only by a compelling interest.  Smith later explained that the unemployment benefits law in Sherbert was not generally applicable because the "good cause" standard permitted the government to grant exemptions based on the circumstances underlying each application. Smith went on to hold that "where the State has in place a system of individual exemptions, it may not refuse to extend that system to cases of 'religious hardship' without compelling reason."  A law also lacks general applicability if it prohibits religious conduct while permitting secular conduct that undermines the government's asserted interests in a similar way. In Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc. v. Hialeah, for instance, the City of Hialeah adopted several ordinances prohibiting animal sacrifice, a practice of the Santeria faith. The City claimed that the ordinances were necessary in part to protect public health, which was "threatened by the disposal of animal carcasses in open public places."  But the ordinances did not regulate hunters' disposal of their kills or improper garbage disposal by restaurants, both of which posed a similar hazard. The Court concluded that this and other forms of underinclusiveness meant that the ordinances were not generally applicable. The City initially argued that CSS's practice violated section 3.21 of its standard foster care contract. We conclude, however, that this provision is not generally applicable as required by Smith. The current version of section 3.21 specifies in pertinent part:"Rejection of Referral. Provider shall not reject a child or family including, but not limited to, ... prospective foster or adoptive parents, for Services based upon ... their ... sexual orientation ... unless an exception is granted by the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee, in his/her sole discretion."  This provision requires an agency to provide "Services," defined as "the work to be performed under this Contract," to prospective foster parents regardless of their sexual orientation. Like the good cause provision in Sherbert, section 3.21 incorporates a system of individual exemptions, made available in this case at the "sole discretion" of the Commissioner. The City has made clear that the Commissioner "has no intention of granting an exception" to CSS.  But the City "may not refuse to extend that [exemption] system to cases of 'religious hardship' without compelling reason." [T]he City and intervenor-respondents contend that the availability of exceptions under section 3.21 is irrelevant because the Commissioner has never granted one. That misapprehends the issue. The creation of a formal mechanism for granting exceptions renders a policy not generally applicable, regardless whether any exceptions have been given, because it "invite[s]" the government to decide which reasons for not complying with the policy are worthy of solicitude, here, at the Commissioner's "sole discretion." The contractual non-discrimination requirement imposes a burden on CSS's religious exercise and does not qualify as generally applicable. [therefore, strict scrutiny] A government policy can survive strict scrutiny only if it advances "interests of the highest order" and is narrowly tailored to achieve those interests. Put another way, so long as the government can achieve its interests in a manner that does not burden religion, it must do so. The City asserts that its non-discrimination policies serve three compelling interests: maximizing the number of foster parents, protecting the City from liability, and ensuring equal treatment of prospective foster parents and foster children. The City states these objectives at a high level of generality, but the First Amendment demands a more precise analysis. harm of granting specific exemptions to particular religious claimants." The question, then, is not whether the City has a compelling interest in enforcing its non-discrimination policies generally, but whether it has such an interest in denying an exception to CSS. Once properly narrowed, the City's asserted interests are insufficient. Maximizing the number of foster families and minimizing liability are important goals, but the City fails to show that granting CSS an exception will put those goals at risk. If anything, including CSS in the program seems likely to increase, not reduce, the number of available foster parents. As for liability, the City offers only speculation that it might be sued over CSS's certification practices. Such speculation is insufficient to satisfy strict scrutiny, particularly because the authority to certify foster families is delegated to agencies by the State, not the City. That leaves the interest of the City in the equal treatment of prospective foster parents and foster children. We do not doubt that this interest is a weighty one, for "[o]ur society has come to the recognition that gay persons and gay couples cannot be treated as social outcasts or as inferior in dignity and worth." Masterpiece Cakeshop. On the facts of this case, however, this interest cannot justify denying CSS an exception for its religious exercise. The creation of a system of exceptions under the contract undermines the City's contention that its non-discrimination policies can brook no departures. The City offers no compelling reason why it has a particular interest in denying an exception to CSS while making them available to others. As Philadelphia acknowledges, CSS has "long been a point of light in the City's foster-care system." CSS seeks only an accommodation that will allow it to continue serving the children of Philadelphia in a manner consistent with its religious beliefs; it does not seek to impose those beliefs on anyone else. The refusal of Philadelphia to contract with CSS for the provision of foster care services unless it agrees to certify same-sex couples as foster parents cannot survive strict scrutiny, and violates the First Amendment. **Justice BARRETT, with whom Justice KAVANAUGH joins, and with whom Justice BREYER joins as to all but the first paragraph, concurring.**In Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Ore. v. Smith, this Court held that a neutral and generally applicable law typically does not violate the Free Exercise Clause-no matter how severely that law burdens religious exercise. Petitioners, their amici, scholars, and Justices of this Court have made serious arguments that Smith ought to be overruled. While history looms large in this debate, I find the historical record more silent than supportive on the question whether the founding generation understood the First Amendment to require religious exemptions from generally applicable laws in at least some circumstances. In my view, the textual and structural arguments against Smith are more compelling. As a matter of text and structure, it is difficult to see why the Free Exercise Clause-lone among the First Amendment freedoms-offers nothing more than protection from discrimination. Yet what should replace Smith? The prevailing assumption seems to be that strict scrutiny would apply whenever a *neutral and generally applicable law burdens religious exercise. But I am skeptical about swapping Smith's categorical antidiscrimination approach for an equally categorical strict scrutiny regime, particularly when this Court's resolution of conflicts between generally applicable laws and other First Amendment rights-like speech and assembly-has been much more nuanced. There would be a number of issues to work through if Smith were overruled. To name a few: Should entities like Catholic Social Services-which is an arm of the Catholic Church-be treated differently than individuals?  Should there be a distinction between indirect and direct burdens on religious exercise? What forms of scrutiny should apply? And if the answer is strict scrutiny, would pre-Smith cases rejecting free exercise challenges to garden-variety laws come out the same way?  We need not wrestle with these questions in this case, though, because the same standard applies regardless whether Smith stays or goes. A longstanding tenet of our free exercise jurisprudence-one that both pre-dates and survives Smith-is that a law burdening religious exercise must satisfy strict scrutiny if it gives government officials discretion to grant individualized exemptions. As the Court's opinion today explains, the government contract at issue provides for individualized exemptions from its nondiscrimination rule, thus triggering strict scrutiny. And all nine Justices agree that the City cannot satisfy strict scrutiny. I therefore see no reason to decide in this case whether Smith should be overruled, much less what should replace it. I join the Court's opinion in full. **Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice GORSUCH join, concurring in the judgment.**This case presents an important constitutional question that urgently calls out for review: whether this Court's governing interpretation of a bedrock constitutional right, the right to the free exercise of religion, is fundamentally wrong and should be corrected. In Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Ore. v. Smith, the Court abruptly pushed aside nearly 30 years of precedent and held that the First Amendment's Free Exercise Clause tolerates any rule that categorically prohibits or commands specified conduct so long as it does not target religious practice. Even if a rule serves no important purpose and has a devastating effect on religious freedom, the Constitution, according to Smith, provides no protection. This severe holding is ripe for reexamination. There is no question that Smith's interpretation can have startling consequences. *1884 Here are a few examples. Suppose that the Volstead Act, which implemented the Prohibition Amendment, had not contained an exception for sacramental wine. The Act would have been consistent with Smith even though it would have prevented the celebration of a Catholic Mass anywhere in the United States. Or suppose that a State, following the example of several European countries, made it unlawful to slaughter an animal that had not first been rendered unconscious. That law would be fine under Smith even though it would outlaw kosher and halal slaughter. Or suppose that a jurisdiction in this country, following the recommendations of medical associations in Europe, banned the circumcision of infants. A San Francisco ballot initiative in 2010 proposed just that. A categorical ban would be allowed by Smith even though it would prohibit an ancient and important Jewish and Muslim practice. Or suppose that this Court or some other court enforced a rigid rule prohibiting attorneys from wearing any form of head covering in court. The rule would satisfy Smith even though it would prevent Orthodox Jewish men, Sikh men, and many Muslim women from appearing. Many other examples could be added. We may hope that legislators and others with rulemaking authority will not go as far as Smith allows, but the present case shows that the dangers posed by Smith are not hypothetical. The city of Philadelphia (City) has issued an ultimatum to an arm of the Catholic Church: Either engage in conduct that the Church views as contrary to the traditional Christian understanding of marriage or abandon a mission that dates back to the earliest days of the Church---providing for the care of orphaned and abandoned children. One of the questions that we accepted for review is "[w]hether Employment Division v. Smith should be revisited." We should confront that question. Regrettably, the Court declines to do so. Instead, it reverses based on what appears to be a superfluous (and likely to be short-lived) feature of the City's standard annual contract with foster care agencies. Smith's holding about categorical rules does not apply if a rule permits individualized exemptions, and the majority seizes on the presence in the City's standard contract of language giving a City official the power to grant exemptions. The City tells us that it has never granted such an exemption and has no intention of handing one to CSS, but the majority reverses the decision below because the contract supposedly confers that never-used power.  This decision might as well be written on the dissolving paper sold in magic shops. The City has been adamant about pressuring CSS to give in, and if the City wants to get around today's decision, it can simply eliminate the never-used exemption power. If it does that, then, voilà, today's decision will vanish-and the parties will be back where they started. The City will claim that it is protected by Smith; CSS will argue that Smith should be overruled; the lower courts, bound by Smith, will reject that argument; and CSS will file a new petition in this Court challenging Smith. What is the point of going around in this circle? We should reconsider Smith without further delay. The correct interpretation of the Free Exercise Clause is a question of great importance, and Smith's interpretation is hard to defend. It can't be squared with the ordinary meaning of the text of the Free Exercise Clause or with the prevalent understanding of the scope of the free-exercise right at the time of the First Amendment's adoption. It swept aside decades of established precedent, and it has not aged well. Its interpretation has been undermined by subsequent scholarship on the original meaning of the Free Exercise Clause. Contrary to what many initially expected, Smith has not provided a clear-cut rule that is easy to apply, and experience has disproved the Smith majority's fear that retention of the Court's prior free-exercise jurisprudence would lead to "anarchy." *1889 When Smith reinterpreted the Free Exercise Clause, four Justices-Brennan, Marshall, Blackmun, and O'Connor-registered strong disagreement. After joining the Court, Justice Souter called for Smith to be reexamined. So have five sitting Justices. So have some of the country's most distinguished scholars of the Religion Clauses. On two separate occasions, Congress, with virtual unanimity, expressed the view that Smith's interpretation is contrary to our society's deep-rooted commitment to religious liberty. In enacting the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993, and the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act of 2000, Congress tried to restore the constitutional rule in place before Smith was handed down. Those laws, however, do not apply to most state action, and they leave huge gaps. It is high time for us to take a fresh look at what the Free Exercise Clause demands. RFRA and RLUIPA have restored part of the protection that Smith withdrew, but they are both limited in scope and can be weakened or repealed by Congress at any time. They are no substitute for a proper interpretation of the Free Exercise Clause.[W]e should begin by considering the "normal and ordinary" meaning of the text of the Free Exercise Clause: "Congress shall make no law ... prohibiting the free exercise [of religion]." Most of these terms and phrases---"Congress," "shall make," "no law,"28 and "religion"---do not require discussion for present purposes, and we can therefore focus on what remains: the term "prohibiting" and the phrase "the free exercise of religion." Those words had essentially the same meaning in 1791 as they do today. "To prohibit" meant either "[t]o forbid" or "to hinder." 2 S. Johnson, A Dictionary of the English Language (1755) (Johnson (1755)).30 The term "exercise" had both a broad primary definition ("[p]ractice" or "outward performance") and a narrower secondary one (an "[a]ct of divine worship whether publick or private"). 1 id.31 (The Court long ago declined to give the First Amendment's reference to "exercise" this narrow reading. See, e.g., Cantwell v. Connecticut (1940).) And "free," in the sense relevant here, meant "unrestrained." 1 Johnson (1755).32 If we put these definitions together, the ordinary meaning of "prohibiting the free exercise of religion" was (and still is) forbidding or hindering unrestrained religious practices or worship. That straightforward understanding is a far cry from the interpretation adopted in Smith. It certainly does not suggest a distinction between laws that are generally applicable and laws that are targeted. As interpreted in Smith, the Clause is essentially an anti-discrimination provision: It means that the Federal Government and the States cannot restrict conduct that constitutes a religious practice for some people unless it imposes the same restriction on everyone else who engages in the same conduct. Smith made no real attempt to square that equal-treatment interpretation with the ordinary meaning of the Free Exercise Clause's language, and it is hard to see how that could be done. The key point for present purposes is that the text of the Free Exercise Clause gives a specific group of people (those who wish to engage in the "exercise of religion") the right to do so without hindrance. The language of the Clause does not tie this right to the treatment of persons not in this group. The oddity of Smith's interpretation can be illustrated by considering what the same sort of interpretation would mean if applied to other provisions of the Bill of Rights. Take the Sixth Amendment, which gives a specified group of people (the "accused" in criminal cases) a particular right (the right to the "Assistance of Counsel for [their] defence"). Suppose that Congress or a state legislature adopted a law banning counsel in all litigation, civil and criminal. Would anyone doubt that this law would violate the Sixth Amendment rights of criminal defendants? Or consider the Seventh Amendment, which gives a specified group of people (parties in most civil "Suits at common law") "the right of trial by jury." Would there be any question that a law abolishing juries in all civil cases would violate the rights of parties in cases that fall within the Seventh Amendment's scope? Other examples involving language similar to that in the Free Exercise Clause are easy to imagine. Suppose that the amount of time generally allotted to complete a state bar exam is 12 hours but that applicants with disabilities secure a consent decree allowing them an extra hour. Suppose that the State later adopts a rule requiring all applicants to complete the exam in 11 hours. Would anyone argue that this was consistent with the decree? Suppose that classic car enthusiasts secure the passage of a state constitutional amendment exempting cars of a certain age from annual safety inspections, but the legislature later enacts a law requiring such inspections for all vehicles regardless of age. Can there be any doubt that this would violate the state constitution? It is not necessary to belabor this point further. What all these examples show is that Smith's interpretation conflicts with the ordinary meaning of the First Amendment's terms. Is there any way to bring about a reconciliation? The short answer is "no." Survey all the briefs filed in support of respondents (they total more than 40) and three decades of law review articles, and what will you find? Philadelphia's brief refers in passing to one possible argument-and the source it cites is a law review article by one of Smith's leading academic critics, Professor Michael W. McConnell.  Trying to see if there was any way to make Smith fit with the constitutional text, Professor McConnell came up with this argument-but then rejected it.  The argument goes as follows: Even if a law prohibits conduct that constitutes an essential religious practice, it cannot be said to "prohibit" the free exercise of religion unless that was the lawmakers' specific object. This is a hair-splitting interpretation. It certainly does not represent the "normal and ordinary" meaning of the Free Exercise Clause's terms. Consider how it would play out if applied to some of the hypothetical laws discussed at the beginning of this opinion. A law categorically banning all wine would not "prohibit" the celebration of a Catholic Mass? A law categorically forbidding the slaughter of a conscious animal would not "prohibit" kosher and halal slaughterhouses? A rule categorically banning any head covering in a courtroom would not "prohibit" appearances by orthodox Jewish men, Sikh men, and Muslim women who wear hijabs? It is no wonder that Smith's many defenders have almost uniformly forgone this argument. Not only is it difficult to square Smith's interpretation with the terms of the Free Exercise Clause, the absence of any language referring to equal treatment is striking. If equal treatment was the objective, why didn't Congress say that? And since it would have been simple to cast the Free Exercise Clause in equal-treatment terms, why would the state legislators who voted for ratification have read the Clause that way? It is not as if there were no models that could have been used. Other constitutional provisions contain non-discrimination language. For example, Art. I, § 9, cl. 6, provides that "[n]o Preference shall be given by any Regulation of Commerce or Revenue to the Ports of one State over those of another." Under Art. IV, § 2, cl. 1, "[t]he Citizens of each State shall be entitled to all Privileges and Immunities of Citizens in the several States." Article V provides that "no State, without its Consent, shall be deprived of its equal Suffrage in the Senate." Language mandating equal treatment of one sort or another also appeared in the religious liberty provisions of colonial charters and state constitutions.33 But Congress eschewed those models. The contrast between these readily available anti-discrimination models and the language that appears in the First Amendment speaks volumes. While we presume that the words of the Constitution carry their ordinary and normal meaning, we cannot disregard the possibility that some of the terms in the Free Exercise Clause had a special meaning that was well understood at the time. Heller, again, provides a helpful example. Heller did not hold that the right to keep and bear arms means that everyone has the right to keep and bear every type of weaponry in all places and at all times. Instead, it held that the Second Amendment protects a known right that was understood to have defined dimensions.  Following Heller's lead, we must ask whether the Free Exercise Clause protects a right that was known at the time of adoption to have defined dimensions. But in doing so, we must keep in mind that there is a presumption that the words of the Constitution are to be interpreted in accordance with their "normal and ordinary" sense. Anyone advocating a different reading must overcome that presumption. What was the free-exercise right understood to mean when the Bill of Rights was ratified? And in particular, was it clearly understood that the right simply required equal treatment for religious and secular conduct? When Smith was decided, scholars had not devoted much attention to the original meaning of the Free Exercise Clause, and the parties' briefs ignored this issue, as did the opinion of the Court. Since then, however, the historical record has been plumbed in detail, and we are now in a good position to examine how the free-exercise right was understood when the First Amendment was adopted. By that date, the right to religious liberty already had a long, rich, and complex history in this country. What appears to be the first "free exercise" provision was adopted in 1649. Prompted by Lord Baltimore, the Maryland Assembly enacted a provision protecting the right of all Christians to engage in "the free exercise" of religion. Rhode Island's 1663 Charter extended the right to all. Early colonial charters and agreements in Carolina, Delaware, New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania also recognized the right to free exercise, and by 1789, every State except Connecticut had a constitutional provision protecting religious liberty. In fact, the Free Exercise Clause had more analogs in State Constitutions than any other individual right. In all of those State Constitutions, freedom of religion enjoyed broad protection, and the right "was universally said to be an unalienable right." What was this right understood to protect? In seeking to discern that meaning, it is easy to get lost in the voluminous discussion of religious liberty that occurred during the long period from the first British settlements to the adoption of the Bill of Rights. Many different political figures, religious leaders, and others spoke and wrote about religious liberty and the relationship between the authority of civil governments and religious bodies. The works of a variety of thinkers were influential, and views on religious liberty were informed by religion, philosophy, historical experience, particular controversies and issues, and in no small measure by the practical task of uniting the Nation. The picture is complex. For present purposes, we can narrow our focus and concentrate on the circumstances that relate most directly to the adoption of the Free Exercise Clause. As has often been recounted, critical state ratifying conventions approved the Constitution on the understanding that it would be amended to provide express protection for certain fundamental rights, and the right to religious liberty was unquestionably one of those rights. As noted, it was expressly protected in 12 of the 13 State Constitutions, and these state constitutional provisions provide the best evidence of the scope of the right embodied in the First Amendment. When we look at these provisions, we see one predominant model. This model extends broad protection for religious liberty but expressly provides that the right does not protect conduct that would endanger "the public peace" or "safety." This model had deep roots in early colonial charters. It appeared in the Rhode Island Charter of 1663, the Second Charter of Carolina in 1665, and the New York Act Declaring Rights & Priviledges in 1691. By the founding, more than half of the State Constitutions contained free-exercise provisions subject to a "peace and safety" carveout or something similar. The Georgia Constitution is a good example. It provided that "[a]ll persons whatever shall have the free exercise of their religion; provided it be not repugnant to the peace and safety of the State."  The founding era Constitutions of Delaware, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island, and South Carolina all contained broad protections for religious exercise, subject to limited peace-and-safety carveouts. The predominance of this model is highlighted by its use in the laws governing the Northwest Territory. In the Northwest Ordinance of 1787, the Continental Congress provided that "[n]o person, demeaning himself in a peaceable and orderly manner, shall ever be molested on account of his mode of worship, or religious sentiments, in the said territory." Art. I (emphasis added). After the ratification of the Constitution, the First Congress used similar language in the Northwest Ordinance of 1789. Since the First Congress also framed and approved the Bill of Rights, we have often said that its apparent understanding of the scope of those rights is entitled to great respect. The model favored by Congress and the state legislatures---providing broad protection for the free exercise of religion except where public "peace" or "safety" would be endangered---is antithetical to Smith. If, as Smith held, the free-exercise right does not require any religious exemptions from generally applicable laws, it is not easy to imagine situations in which a public-peace-or-safety carveout would be necessary. Legislatures enact generally applicable laws to protect public peace and safety. If those laws are thought to be sufficient to address a particular type of conduct when engaged in for a secular purpose, why wouldn't they also be sufficient to address the same type of conduct when carried out for a religious reason? Smith's defenders have no good answer. Their chief response is that the free-exercise provisions that included these carveouts were tantamount to the Smith rule because any conduct that is generally prohibited or generally required can be regarded as necessary to protect public peace or safety.  This argument gives "public peace and safety" an unnaturally broad interpretation. Samuel Johnson's 1755 dictionary defined "peace" as: "1. Respite from war.... 2. Quiet from suits or disturbances.... 3. Rest from any commotion. 4. Stil[l]ness from riots or tumults.... 5. Reconciliation of differences.... 6. A state not hostile.... 7. Rest; quiet; content; freedom from terrour; heavenly rest...."  In ordinary usage, the term "safety" was understood to mean: "1. Freedom from danger.... 2. Exemption from hurt. 3. Preservation from hurt...."  When "peace" and "safety" are understood in this way, it cannot be said that every violation of every law imperils public "peace" or "safety." In 1791 (and today), violations of many laws do not threaten "war," "disturbances," "commotion," "riots," "terrour," "danger," or "hurt." Blackstone catalogs numerous violations that do not threaten any such harms, including "cursing"; refusing to pay assessments for "the repairs of sea banks and sea walls" and the "cleansing of rivers, public streams, ditches and other conduits"; "retaining a man's hired servant before his time is expired"; an attorney's failure to show up for a trial; the unauthorized "solemniz[ing of a] marriage in any other place besides a church, or public chapel wherein banns have been usually published"; "transporting and seducing our artists to settle abroad"; engaging in the conduct of "a common scold"; and "exercis[ing] a trade in any town, without having previously served as an apprentice for seven years." In contrast to these violations, Blackstone lists "offences against the public peace."  Those include: riotous assembling of 12 persons or more; unlawful hunting; anonymous threats and demands; destruction of public floodgates, locks, or sluices on a navigable river; public fighting; riots or unlawful assemblies; "tumultuous" petitioning; forcible entry or detainer; riding or "going armed" with dangerous or unusual weapons; spreading false news to "make discord between the king and nobility, or concerning any great man of the realm"; spreading "false and pretended" prophecies to disturb the peace; provoking breaches of the peace; and libel "to provoke ... wrath, or expose [an individual] to public hatred, contempt, and ridicule." These offenses might inform what constitutes actual or threatened breaches of public peace or safety in the ordinary sense of those terms. But the ordinary meaning of offenses that threaten public peace or safety must be stretched beyond the breaking point to encompass all violations of any law. That the free-exercise right included the right to certain religious exemptions is strongly supported by the practice of the Colonies and States. When there were important clashes between generally applicable laws and the religious practices of particular groups, colonial and state legislatures were willing to grant exemptions---even when the generally applicable laws served critical state interests. Oath exemptions are illustrative. Oath requirements were considered "indispensable" to civil society because they were thought to ensure that individuals gave truthful testimony and fulfilled commitments. Quakers and members of some other religious groups refused to take oaths, and therefore a categorical oath requirement would have resulted in the complete exclusion of these Americans from important civic activities, such as testifying in court and voting. Tellingly, that is not what happened. In the 1600s, Carolina allowed Quakers to enter a pledge rather than swearing an oath. In 1691, New York permitted Quakers to give testimony after giving an affirmation. Massachusetts did the same in 1743. In 1734, New York also allowed Quakers to qualify to vote by making an affirmation, and in 1740, Georgia granted an exemption to Jews, allowing them to omit the phrase " 'on the faith of a Christian' " from the State's naturalization oath. By 1789, almost all States had passed oath exemptions. Some early State Constitutions and declarations of rights formally provided oath exemptions for religious objectors. For instance, the Maryland Declaration of Rights of 1776 declared that Quakers, Mennonites, and members of some other religious groups "ought to be allowed to make their solemn affirmation" instead of an oath. Similarly, the Massachusetts Constitution of 1780 permitted Quakers holding certain government positions to decline to take the prescribed oath of office, allowing affirmations instead. The Federal Constitution likewise permits federal and state officials to make either an "Oath or Affirmation, to support this Constitution."  Military conscription provides an even more revealing example. In the Colonies and later in the States, able-bodied men of a certain age were required to serve in the militia, but Quakers, Mennonites, and members of some other religious groups objected to militia service on religious grounds. The militia was regarded as essential to the security of the State and the preservation of freedom, but colonial governments nevertheless granted religious exemptions. Rhode Island, Maryland, North Carolina, and New Hampshire did so in the founding era. In 1755, New York permitted a conscientious objector to obtain an exemption if he paid a fee or sent a substitute. Massachusetts adopted a similar law two years later, and Virginia followed suit in 1776.  The Continental Congress also granted exemptions to religious objectors because conscription would do "violence to their consciences." This decision is especially revealing because during that time the Continental Army was periodically in desperate need of soldiers, the very survival of the new Nation often seemed in danger, and the Members of Congress faced bleak personal prospects if the war was lost. Yet despite these stakes, exemptions were granted.Defenders of Smith have advanced historical arguments of their own, but they are unconvincing, and in any event, plainly insufficient to overcome the ordinary meaning of the constitutional text. One prominent argument points to language in some founding-era charters and constitutions prohibiting laws or government actions that were taken "for" or "on account" of religion. That phrasing, it is argued, reaches only measures that target religion, not neutral and generally applicable laws. This argument has many flaws. No such language appears in the Free Exercise Clause, and in any event, the argument rests on a crabbed reading of the words "for" or "on account of " religion. As Professor McConnell has explained, "[i]f a member of the Native American Church is arrested for ingesting peyote during a religious ceremony, then he surely is molested 'for' or 'on account of ' his religious practice-even though the law under which he is arrested is neutral and generally applicable."  This argument also ignores the full text of many of the provisions on which it relies.  While some protect against government actions taken "for" or "on account of " religion, they do not stop there. Instead, they go on to provide broader protection for religious liberty. See, e.g., Maryland Act Concerning Religion (1649) (guaranteeing residents not be "troubled ... in the free exercise [of religion]").[much more history] In sum, based on the text of the Free Exercise Clause and evidence about the original understanding of the free-exercise right, the case for Smith fails to overcome the more natural reading of the text. Indeed, the case against Smith is very convincing. That conclusion cannot end our analysis. "We will not overturn a past decision unless there are strong grounds for doing so," but at the same time, stare decisis is "not an inexorable command."  It "is at its weakest when we interpret the Constitution because our interpretation can be altered only by constitutional amendment or by overruling our prior decisions." And it applies with "perhaps least force of all to decisions that wrongly denied First Amendment rights." In assessing whether to overrule a past decision that appears to be incorrect, we have considered a variety of factors, and four of those weigh strongly against Smith: its reasoning; its consistency with other decisions; the workability of the rule that it established; and developments since the decision was handed down. No relevant factor, including reliance, weighs in Smith's favor. Smith's reasoning. As explained in detail above, Smith is a methodological outlier. It ignored the "normal and ordinary" meaning of the constitutional text, and it made no real effort to explore the understanding of the free-exercise right at the time of the First Amendment's adoption. And the Court adopted its reading of the Free Exercise Clause with no briefing on the issue from the parties or amici.  Then there is Smith's treatment of precedent. It looked for precedential support in strange places, and the many precedents that stood in its way received remarkably rough treatment. [detailing Smith treatment of precedent]Finally, having swept all these cases from the board, Smith still faced at least one big troublesome precedent: Yoder. Yoder not only applied the Sherbert test but held that the Free Exercise Clause required an exemption totally unrelated to unemployment benefits. To dispose of Yoder, Smith was forced to invent yet another special category of cases, those involving "hybrid-rights" claims. Yoder fell into this category because it implicated both the Amish parents' free-exercise claim and a parental-rights claim stemming from Pierce v. Society of Sisters. And in such hybrid cases, Smith held, the Sherbert test survived.  It is hard to see the justification for this curious doctrine. The idea seems to be that if two independently insufficient constitutional claims join forces they may merge into a single valid hybrid claim, but surely the rule cannot be that asserting two invalid claims, no matter how weak, is always enough. So perhaps the doctrine requires the assignment of a numerical score to each claim. If a passing grade is 70 and a party advances a free-speech claim that earns a grade of 40 and a free-exercise claim that merits a grade of 31, the result would be a (barely) sufficient hybrid claim. Such a scheme is obviously unworkable and has never been recognized outside of Smith. And then there is the problem that the hybrid-rights exception would largely swallow up Smith's general rule. A great many claims for religious exemptions can easily be understood as hybrid free-exercise/free-speech claims. Take the claim in Smith itself. To members of the Native American Church, the ingestion of peyote during a religious ceremony is a sacrament. When Smith and Black participated in this sacrament, weren't they engaging in a form of expressive conduct? Their ingestion of peyote "communicate[d], in a rather dramatic way, [their] faith in the tenets of the Native American Church," and the State's prohibition of that practice "interfered with their ability to communicate this message" in violation of the Free Speech Clause. And, "if a hybrid claim is one in which a litigant would actually obtain an exemption from a formally neutral, generally applicable law under another constitutional provision, then there would have been no reason for the Court in [the so-called] hybrid cases to have mentioned the Free Exercise Clause at all." It is telling that this Court has never once accepted a "hybrid rights" claim in the more than three decades since Smith. Consistency with other precedents. Smith is also discordant with other precedents. Smith did not overrule Sherbert or any of the other cases that built on Sherbert from 1963 to 1990, and for the reasons just discussed, Smith is tough to harmonize with those precedents. The same is true about more recent decisions. In Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church and School v. EEOC (2012), the Court essentially held that the First Amendment entitled a religious school to a special exemption from the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). When the school discharged a teacher, she claimed that she had been terminated because of disability.  Since the school considered her a "minister" and she provided religious instruction for her students, the school argued that her discharge fell within the so-called "ministerial exception" to generally applicable employment laws.  The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission maintained that Smith precluded recognition of this exception because "the ADA's prohibition on retaliation, like Oregon's prohibition on peyote use, is a valid and neutral law of general applicability."  We nevertheless held that the exception applied.  There is also tension between Smith and our opinion in Masterpiece Cakeshop, Ltd. v. Colorado Civil Rights Comm'n (2018). In that case, we observed that "[w]hen it comes to weddings, it can be assumed that a member of the clergy who objects to gay marriage on moral and religious grounds could not be compelled to perform the ceremony without denial of his or her right to the free exercise of religion." The clear import of this observation is that such a member of the clergy would be entitled to a religious exemption from a state law restricting the authority to perform a state-recognized marriage to individuals who are willing to officiate both opposite-sex and same-sex weddings. Other inconsistencies exist. Smith declared that "a private right to ignore generally applicable laws" would be a "constitutional anomaly," but this Court has often permitted exemptions from generally applicable laws in First Amendment cases. For instance, in Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, we granted the Boy Scouts an exemption from an otherwise generally applicable state public accommodations law. In Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of Boston, Inc., parade sponsors' speech was exempted from the requirements of a similar law. The granting of an exemption from a generally applicable law is tantamount to a holding that a law is unconstitutional as applied to a particular set of facts, and cases holding generally applicable laws unconstitutional as applied are unremarkable. "[T]he normal rule is that partial, rather than facial, invalidation is the required course, such that a statute may ... be declared invalid to the extent that it reaches too far, but otherwise left intact." Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of Northern New Eng.. Thus, in Brown v. Socialist Workers '74 Campaign Comm. (Ohio) (1982), we held that a law requiring disclosure of campaign contributions and expenditures could not be "constitutionally applied" to a minor party whose members and contributors would face "threats, harassment or reprisals."  Cf. NAACP v. Alabama (1958) (exempting the NAACP from a disclosure order entered to purportedly investigate compliance with a generally applicable statute). In Hustler Magazine, Inc. v. Falwell (1988), and Snyder v. Phelps (2011), the Court held that an established and generally applicable tort claim (the intentional infliction of emotional distress) could not constitutionally be applied to the particular expression at issue. Similarly, breach-of-the-peace laws, although generally valid, have been held to violate the Free Speech Clause under certain circumstances.  Workability. One of Smith's supposed virtues was ease of application, but things have not turned out that way. Instead, at least four serious problems have arisen and continue to plague courts when called upon to apply Smith. (1) The "hybrid rights" exception, which was essential to distinguish Yoder, has baffled the lower courts. They are divided into at least three camps. Some courts have taken the extraordinary step of openly refusing to follow this part of Smith's interpretation. The Sixth Circuit was remarkably blunt: "[H]old[ing] that the legal standard under the Free Exercise Clause depends on whether a free-exercise claim is coupled with other constitutional rights ... is completely illogical." A second camp holds that the hybrid-rights exception applies only when a free-exercise claim is joined with some other independently viable claim. The third group requires that the non-free-exercise claim be "colorable."  It is rare to encounter a holding of this Court that has so thoroughly stymied or elicited such open derision from the Courts of Appeals. (2) Rules that "target" religion. Post-Smith cases have also struggled with the task of *1919 determining whether a purportedly neutral rule "targets" religious exercise or has the restriction of religious exercise as its "object."  A threshold question is whether "targeting" calls for an objective or subjective inquiry. Must "targeting" be assessed based solely on the terms of the relevant rule or rules? Or can evidence of the rulemakers' motivation be taken into account? If subjective motivations may be considered, does it matter whether the challenged state action is an adjudication, the promulgation of a rule, or the enactment of legislation? Should courts consider the motivations of only the officials who took the challenged action, or may they also take into account comments by superiors and others in a position of influence? And what degree of hostility to religion or a religious group is required to prove "targeting"? The genesis of this problem was Smith's holding that a rule is not neutral "if prohibiting the exercise of religion" is its "object." Smith did not elaborate on what that meant, and later in Lukumi, which concerned city ordinances that burdened the practice of Santeria, Justices in the Smith majority adopted different interpretations. Justice Scalia and Chief Justice Rehnquist took the position that the "object" of a rule must be determined by its terms and that evidence of the rulemakers' motivation should not be considered. This interpretation had the disadvantage of allowing skillful rulemakers to target religious exercise by devising a facially neutral rule that applies to both the targeted religious conduct and a slice of secular conduct that can be burdened without eliciting unacceptable opposition from those whose interests are affected. The alternative to this approach takes courts into the difficult business of ascertaining the subjective motivations of rulemakers. In Lukumi, Justices Kennedy and Stevens took that path and relied on numerous statements by council members showing that their object was to ban the practice of Santeria within the city's borders. Thus, Lukumi left the meaning of a rule's "object" up in the air. When the issue returned in Masterpiece Cakeshop, the question was only partially resolved. Holding that the Colorado Civil Rights Commission violated the free-exercise rights of a baker who refused for religious reasons to create a cake for a same-sex wedding, the Court pointed to disparaging statements made by commission members, and the Court noted that these comments, "by an adjudicatory body deciding a particular case," "were made in a very different context" from the remarks by the council members in Lukumi. That is as far as this Court's decisions have gone on the question of targeting, and thus many important questions remain open. The present case highlights two-specifically, which officials' motivations are relevant and what degree of disparagement must be shown to establish unconstitutional targeting. In Masterpiece Cakeshop, the commissioners' statements---comparing the baker's actions to the Holocaust and slavery and suggesting that his beliefs were just an excuse for bigotry---went too far. But what about the comments of Philadelphia officials in this case? The city council labeled CSS's policy "discrimination that occurs under the guise of religious freedom." The mayor had said that the Archbishop's actions were not "Christian," and he once called on the Pope "to kick some ass here." In addition, the commissioner of the Department of Human Services (DHS), who serves at the mayor's pleasure, disparaged CSS's policy as out of date and out of touch with Pope Francis's teachings. The Third Circuit found this evidence insufficient. Although the mayor conferred with the DHS commissioner both before and after her meeting with CSS representatives, the mayor's remarks were disregarded because there was no evidence "that he played a direct role, or even a significant role, in the process."  The city council's suggestion that CSS's religious liberty claim was a "guise" for discrimination was found to "fal[l] into [a] grey zone," and the commissioner's debate with a CSS representative about up-to-date Catholic teaching, which "some might think ... improper" "if taken out of context" was "best viewed as an effort to reach common ground with [CSS] by appealing to an authority within their shared religious tradition." One may agree or disagree with the Third Circuit's characterization and evaluation of the statements of the City officials, but the court's analysis highlights the extremely impressionistic inquiry that Smith's targeting requirement may entail. Confusion and disagreement about "targeting" have surfaced in other cases. [describing more](3) The nature and scope of exemptions. There is confusion about the meaning of Smith's holding on exemptions from generally applicable laws. Some decisions apply this special rule if multiple secular exemptions are granted. Others conclude that even one secular exemption is enough. \And still others have applied the rule where the law, although allowing no exemptions on its face, was widely unenforced in cases involving secular conduct.  (4) Identifying appropriate comparators. To determine whether a law provides equal treatment for secular and religious conduct, two steps are required. First, a court must identify the secular conduct with which the religious conduct is to be compared. Second, the court must determine whether the State's reasons for regulating the religious conduct apply with equal force to the secular conduct with which it is compared. In Smith, this inquiry undoubtedly seemed straightforward: The secular conduct and the religious conduct prohibited by the Oregon criminal statute were identical. But things are not always that simple. Cases involving rules designed to slow the spread of COVID-19 have driven that point home. State and local rules adopted for this purpose have typically imposed different restrictions for different categories of activities. Sometimes religious services have been placed in a category with certain secular activities, and sometimes religious services have been given a separate category of their own. To determine whether COVID-19 rules provided neutral treatment for religious and secular conduct, it has been necessary to compare the restrictions on religious services with the restrictions on secular activities that present a comparable risk of spreading the virus, and identifying the secular activities that should be used for comparison has been hotly contested. In South Bay United Pentecostal Church v. Newsom (2020), where the Court refused to enjoin restrictions on religious services, THE CHIEF JUSTICE's concurrence likened religious services to lectures, concerts, movies, sports events, and theatrical performances. The dissenters, on the other hand, focused on "supermarkets, restaurants, factories, and offices."  In Calvary Chapel Dayton Valley v. Sisolak (2020), Nevada defended a rule imposing severe limits on attendance at religious services and argued that houses of worship should be compared with "movie theaters, museums, art galleries, zoos, aquariums, trade schools, and technical schools."  Members of this Court who would have enjoined the Nevada rule looked to the State's more generous rules for casinos, bowling alleys, and fitness facilities.  In Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn, Justices in the majority compared houses of worship with large retail establishments, factories, schools, liquor stores, bicycle repair shops, and pet shops, while dissenters cited theaters and concert halls. In Danville Christian Academy, Inc. v. Beshear, the District Court enjoined enforcement of an executive order that compelled the closing of a religiously affiliated school, reasoning that the State permitted pre-schools, colleges, and universities to stay open and also allowed attendance at concerts and lectures. The Sixth Circuit reversed, concluding that the rule was neutral and generally applicable because it applied to all elementary and secondary schools, whether secular or religious. Much of Smith's initial appeal was likely its apparent simplicity. Smith seemed to offer a relatively simple and clear-cut rule that would be easy to apply. Experience has shown otherwise. Subsequent developments. Developments since Smith provide additional reasons for changing course. The Smith majority thought that adherence to Sherbert would invite "anarchy," but experience has shown that this fear was not well founded. Both RFRA and RLUIPA impose essentially the same requirements as Sherbert, and we have observed that the courts are well "up to the task" of applying that test.  Multiple factors strongly favor overruling Smith. Are there countervailing factors? None is apparent. Reliance is often the strongest factor favoring the retention of a challenged precedent, but no strong reliance interests are cited in any of the numerous briefs urging us to preserve Smith. Indeed, the term is rarely even mentioned. All that the City has to say on the subject is that overruling Smith would cause "substantial regulatory ... disruption" by displacing RFRA, RLUIPA, and related state laws, but this is a baffling argument. How would overruling Smith disrupt the operation of laws that were enacted to abrogate Smith? One of the City's amici, the New York State Bar Association, offers a different reliance argument. It claims that some individuals, relying on Smith, have moved to jurisdictions with anti-discrimination laws that do not permit religious exemptions. The bar association does not cite any actual examples of individuals who fall into this category, and there is reason to doubt that many actually exist. For the hypothesized course of conduct to make sense, all of the following conditions would have to be met. First, it would be necessary for the individuals in question to believe that a religiously motivated party in the jurisdiction they left or avoided might engage in conduct that harmed them. Second, this conduct would have to be conduct not already protected by Smith in that it (a) did not violate a generally applicable state law, (b) that law did not allow individual exemptions, and (c) there was insufficient proof of religious targeting. Third, the feared conduct would have to fall outside the scope of RLUIPA. Fourth, the conduct, although not protected by Smith, would have to be otherwise permitted by local law, for example, through a state version of RFRA. Fifth, this fear of harm at the hands of a religiously motivated actor would have to be a but-for cause of the decision to move. Perhaps there are individuals who fall into the category that the bar association hypothesizes, but we should not allow violations of the Free Exercise Clause in perpetuity based on such speculation.  Smith was wrongly decided. As long as it remains on the books, it threatens a fundamental freedom. And while precedent should not lightly be cast aside, the Court's error in Smith should now be corrected. If Smith is overruled, what legal standard should be applied in this case? The answer that comes most readily to mind is the standard that Smith replaced: A law that imposes a substantial burden on religious exercise can be sustained only if it is narrowly tailored to serve a compelling government interest. Whether this test should be rephrased or supplemented with specific rules is a question that need not be resolved here because Philadelphia's ouster of CSS from foster care work simply does not further any interest that can properly be protected in this case. As noted, CSS's policy has not hindered any same-sex couples from becoming foster parents, and there is no threat that it will do so in the future. CSS's policy has only one effect: It expresses the idea that same-sex couples should not be foster parents because only a man and a woman should marry. Many people today find this idea not only objectionable but hurtful. Nevertheless, protecting against this form of harm is not an interest that can justify the abridgment of First Amendment rights. We have covered this ground repeatedly in free speech cases. In an open, pluralistic, self-governing society, the expression of an idea cannot be suppressed simply because some find it offensive, insulting, or even wounding.  The same fundamental principle applies to religious practices that give offense. The preservation of religious freedom depends on that principle. Many core religious beliefs are perceived as hateful by members of other religions or nonbelievers. Proclaiming that there is only one God is offensive to polytheists, and saying that there are many gods is anathema to Jews, Christians, and Muslims. Declaring that Jesus was the Son of God is offensive to Judaism and Islam, and stating that Jesus was not the Son of God is insulting to Christian belief. Expressing a belief in God is nonsense to atheists, but denying the existence of God or proclaiming that religion has been a plague is infuriating to those for whom religion is all-important. Suppressing speech-or religious practice-simply because it expresses an idea that some find hurtful is a zero-sum game. While CSS's ideas about marriage are likely to be objectionable to same-sex couples, lumping those who hold traditional beliefs about marriage together with racial bigots is insulting to those who retain such beliefs. In Obergefell v. Hodges,  the majority made a commitment. It refused to equate traditional beliefs about marriage, which it termed "decent and honorable," with racism, which is neither. And it promised that "religions, and those who adhere to religious doctrines, may continue to advocate with utmost, sincere conviction that, by divine precepts, same-sex marriage should not be condoned." An open society can keep that promise while still respecting the "dignity," "worth," and fundamental equality of all members of the community.  \newpage 