# Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States

379 U.S. 241 (1964)

**Mr. Justice CLARK delivered the opinion of the Court**

This is a declaratory judgment action, attacking the constitutionality of Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Appellant owns and operates the Heart of Atlanta Motel which has 216 rooms available to transient guests. The motel is located on Courtland Street, two blocks from downtown
Peachtree Street. It is readily accessible to interstate highways 75 and 85
and state highways 23 and 41. Appellant solicits patronage from outside the
State of Georgia through various national advertising media, including
magazines of national circulation; it mainains over 50 billboards and highway
signs within the State, soliciting patronage for the motel; it accepts
convention trade from outside Georgia and approximately 75% of its registered
guests are from out of State. Prior to passage of the Act the motel had
followed a practice of refusing to rent rooms to Negroes, and it alleged that
it intended to continue to do so. In an effort to perpetuate that policy this
suit was filed.

The appellant contends that Congress in passing this Act exceeded its power to
regulate commerce under Art. I, s 8, cl. 3, of the Constitution of the United
States; that the Act violates the Fifth Amendment because appellant is
deprived of the right to choose its customers and operate its business as it
wishes, resulting in a taking of its liberty and property without due process
of law and a taking of its property without just compensation; and, finally,
that by requiring appellant to rent available rooms to Negroes against its
will, Congress is subjecting it to involuntary servitude in contravention of
the Thirteenth Amendment.

The appellees counter that the unavailability to Negroes of adequate
accommodations interferes significantly with interstate travel, and that
Congress, under the Commerce Clause, has power to remove such obstructions and
restraints; that the Fifth Amendment does not forbid reasonable regulation and
that consequential damage does not constitute a 'taking' within the meaning of
that amendment; that the Thirteenth Amendment claim fails because it is
entirely frivolous to say that an amendment directed to the abolition of human
bondage and the removal of widespread disabilities associated with slavery
places discrimination in public accommodations, beyond the reach of both
federal and state law.

Congress first evidenced its interest in civil rights legislation in the Civil
Rights or Enforcement Act of April 9, 1866. There followed four Acts, with a
fifth, the Civil Rights Act of March 1, 1875, culminating the series. In 1883
this Court struck down the public accommodations sections of the 1875 Act in
the Civil Rights Cases. No major
legislation in this field had been enacted by Congress for 82 years when the
Civil Rights Act of 19575 became law. It was followed by the Civil Rights Act
of 1960. Three years later, on June 19, 1963, the late President Kennedy
called for civil rights legislation in a a message to Congress to which he
attached a proposed bill. Its stated purpose was

> to promote the general welfare by eliminating discrimination based on race, color, religion, or national origin in * * * public accommodations through the exercise by Congress of the powers conferred upon it * * * to enforce the provisions of the fourteenth and fifteenth amendments, to regulate commerce among the several States, and to make laws necessary and proper to execute the powers conferred upon it by the Constitution.

Bills were introduced in each House of the Congress, embodying the President's
suggestion, one in the Senate being S. 17327 and one in the House, H.R. 7152.
However, it was not until July 2, 1964, upon the recommendation of President
Johnson, that the Civil Rights Act of 1964, here under attack, was finally
passed.

The Act as finally adopted was most comprehensive, undertaking to prevent
through peaceful and voluntary settlement discrimination in voting, as well as
in places of accommodation and public facilities, federally secured programs
and in employment. Since Title II is the only portion under attack here, we
confine our consideration to those public accommodation provisions.

This Title is divided into seven sections beginning with § 201(a) which
provides that:

> All persons shall be entitled to the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations of any place of public accommodation, as defined in this section, without discrimination or segregation on the ground of race, color, religion, or national origin.'

There are listed in § 201(b) four classes of business establishments, each of
which 'serves the public' and 'is a place of public accommodation' within the
meaning of § 201(a) 'if its operations affect commerce, or if discrimination
or segregation by it is supported by State action.' The covered establishments
are:

> (1) any inn, hotel, motel, or other establishment which provides lodging to transient guests, other than an establishment located within a building which contains not more than five rooms for rent or hire and which is actually occupied by the proprietor of such establishment as his residence;

> (2) any restaurant, cafeteria * * * (not here involved);

> (3) any motion picture house * * * (not here involved);

> (4) any establishment * * * which is physically located within the premises of any establishment otherwise covered by this subsection, or * * * within the premises of which is physically located any such covered establishment * * * (not here involved).'

Section 201(c) defines the phrase 'affect commerce' as applied to the above
establishments. It first declares that 'any inn, hotel, motel, or other
establishment which provides lodging to transient guests' affects commerce per
se. Restaurants, cafeterias, etc., in class two affect commerce only if they
serve or offer to serve interstate travelers or if a substantial portion of
the food which they serve or products which they sell have 'moved in
commerce.' Motion picture houses and other places listed in class three affect
commerce if they customarily present films, performances, etc., 'which move in
commerce.' And the establishments listed in class four affect commerce if they
are within, or include within their own premises, an establishment 'the
operations of which affect commerce.' Private clubs are excepted under certain
conditions. 

Section 201(d) declares that 'discrimination or segregation' is supported by
state action when carried on under color of any law, statute, ordinance,
regulation or any custom or usage required or enforced by officials of the
State or any of its subdivisions.

In addition, § 202 affirmatively declares that all persons 'shall be entitled
to be free, at any establishment or place, from discrimination or segregation
of any kind on the ground of race, color, religion, or national origin, if
such discrimination or segregation is or purports to be required by any law,
statute, ordinance, regulation, rule, or order of a State or any agency or
political subdivision thereof.'

Finally, § 203 prohibits the withholding or denial, etc., of any right or
privilege secured by § 201 and § 202 or the intimidation, threatening or
coercion of any person with the purpose of interfering with any such right or
the punishing, etc., of any person for exercising or attempting to exercise
any such right.

It is admitted that the operation of the motel brings it within the provisions
of § 201(a) of the Act and that appellant refused to provide lodging for
transient Negroes because of their race or color and that it intends to
continue that policy unless restrained.

The sole question posed is, therefore, the constitutionality of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 as applied to these facts. The legislative history of the
Act indicates that Congress based the Act on § 5 and the Equal Protection
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment as well as its power to regulate interstate
commerce under Art. I, § 8, cl. 3, of the Constitution.

The Senate Commerce Committee made it quite clear that the fundamental object
of Title II was to vindicate 'the deprivation of personal dignity that surely
accompanies denials of equal access to public establishments.' At the same
time, however, it noted that such an objective has been and could be readily
achieved 'by congressional action based on the commerce power of the
Constitution.'  Our study of the legislative
record, made in the light of prior cases, has brought us to the conclusion
that Congress possessed ample power in this regard, and we have therefore not
considered the other grounds relied upon. This is not to say that the
remaining authority upon which it acted was not adequate, a question upon
which we do not pass, but merely that since the commerce power is sufficient
for our decision here we have considered it alone. Nor is § 201(d) or § 202,
having to do with state action, involved here and we do not pass upon either
of those sections.

In light of our ground for decision, it might be well at the outset to discuss
the Civil Rights Cases, supra, which declared provisions of the Civil Rights
Act of 1875 unconstitutional. We think that decision
inapposite, and without precedential value in determining the
constitutionality of the present Act. Unlike Title II of the present
legislation, the 1875 Act broadly proscribed discriminaton in 'inns, public
conveyances on land or water, theaters, and other places of public amusement,'
without limiting the categories of affected businesses to those impinging upon
interstate commerce. In contrast, the applicability of Title II is carefully
limited to enterprises having a direct and substantial relation to the
interstate flow of goods and people, except where state action is involved.
Further, the fact that certain kinds of businesses may not in 1875 have been
sufficiently involved in interstate commerce to warrant bringing them within
the ambit of the commerce power is not necessarily dispositive of the same
question today. Our populace had not reached its present mobility, nor were
facilities, goods and services circulating as readily in interstate commerce
as they are today. Although the principles which we apply today are those
first formulated by Chief Justice Marshall in Gibbons v. Ogden, the conditions of transportation and commerce have changed dramatically, and we must apply those principles to the present state of
commerce. The sheer increase in volume of interstate traffic alone would give
discriminatory practices which inhibit travel a far larger impact upon the
Nation's commerce than such practices had on the economy of another day.
Finally, there is language in the Civil Rights Cases which indicates that the
Court did not fully consider whether the 1875 Act could be sustained as an
exercise of the commerce power. Though the Court observed that 'no one will
contend that the power to pass it was contained in the constitution before the
adoption of the last three amendments (Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and
Fifteenth),' the Court went on specifically to note that the Act was not
'conceived' in terms of the commerce power and expressly pointed out:

> Of course, these remarks (as to lack of congressional power) do not apply to those cases in which congress is clothed with direct and plenary powers of legislation over the whole subject, accompanied with an express or implied denial of such power to the states, as in the regulation of commerce with foreign nations, among the several states, and with the Indian tribes * * *. In these cases congress has power to pass laws for regulating the subjects specified, in every detail, and the conduct and transactions of individuals in respect thereof.

Since the commerce power was not relied on by the Government and was without
support in the record it is understandable that the Court narrowed its inquiry
and excluded the Commerce Clause as a possible source of power. In any event,
it is clear that such a limitation renders the opinion devoid of authority for
the proposition that the Commerce Clause gives no power to Congress to
regulate discriminatory practices now found substantially to affect interstate
commerce. We, therefore, conclude that the Civil Rights Cases have no
relevance to the basis of decision here where the Act explicitly relies upon
the commerce power, and where the record is filled with testimony of
obstructions and restraints resulting from the discriminations found to be
existing. We now pass to that phase of the case.

While the Act as adopted carried no congressional findings the record of its
passage through each house is replete with evidence of the burdens that
discrimination by race or color places upon interstate commerce. This testimony
included the fact that our people have become increasingly mobile with
millions of people of all races traveling from State to State; that Negroes in
particular have been the subject of discrimination in transient
accommodations, having to travel great distances to secure the same; that
often they have been unable to obtain accommodations and have had to call upon
friends to put them up overnight; and that these conditions had become so acute as to require the listing of available lodging for Negroes in a special guidebook which was itself 'dramatic
testimony to the difficulties' Negroes encounter in travel.^[*This is the famous "Green Book" -PG*] These exclusionary practices were
found to be nationwide, the Under Secretary of Commerce testifying that there
is 'no question that this discrimination in the North still exists to a large
degree' and in the West and Midwest as well. This testimony
indicated a qualitative as well as quantitative effect on interstate travel by
Negroes. The former was the obvious impairment of the Negro traveler's
pleasure and convenience that resulted when he continually was uncertain of
finding lodging. As for the latter, there was evidence that this uncertainty
stemming from racial discrimination had the effect of discouraging travel on
the part of a substantial portion of the Negro community.  This
was the conclusion not only of the Under Secretary of Commerce but also of the
Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency who wrote the Chairman of the
Senate Commerce Committee that it was his 'belief that air commerce is
adversely affected by the denial to a substantial segment of the traveling
public of adequate and desegregated public accommodations.' 
We shall not burden this opinion with further details since the voluminous
testimony presents overwhelming evidence that discrimination by hotels and
motels impedes interstate travel.


'The transportation of passengers in interstate commerce, it has long been
settled, is within the regulatory power of Congress, under the commerce clause
of the Constitution, and the authority of Congress to keep the channels of
interstate commerce free from immoral and injurious uses has been frequently
sustained, and is no longer open to question.' Nor does it make any difference whether the transportation is commercial in character.

The same interest in protecting interstate commerce which led Congress to deal
with segregation in interstate carriers and the white-slave traffic has
prompted it to extend the exercise of its power to gambling; to
criminal enterprises; to deceptive parctices in the sale of products; to fraudulent security transactions; to misbranding of drugs; to wages and hours; to members of labor unions; to crop control; to discrimination against shippers; to the protection of small business from injurious price cutting; to resale price maintenance; to professional football; and to racial discrimination by owners and managers of terminal restaurants.

That Congress was legislating against moral wrongs in many of these areas
rendered its enactments no less valid. In framing Title II of this Act
Congress was also dealing with what it considered a moral problem. But that
fact does not detract from the overwhelming evidence of the disruptive effect
that racial discrimination has had on commercial intercourse. It was this
burden which empowered Congress to enact appropriate legislation, and, given
this basis for the exercise of its power, Congress was not restricted by the
fact that the particular obstruction to interstate commerce with which it was
dealing was also deemed a moral and social wrong.

It is said that the operation of the motel here is of a purely local
character. But, assuming this to be true, '(i)f it is interstate commerce that
feels the pinch, it does not matter how local the operation which applies the
squeeze.'  As Chief Justice Stone put it in United
States v. Darby:

>The power of Congress over interstate commerce is not confined to the regulation of commerce among the states. It extends to those activities intrastate which so affect interstate commerce or the exercise of the power of Congress over it as to make regulation of them appropriate means to the attainment of a legitimate end, the exercise of the granted power of Congress to regulate interstate commerce. See McCulloch v. Maryland.

Thus the power of Congress to promote interstate commerce also includes the
power to regulate the local incidents thereof, including local activities in
both the States of origin and destination, which might have a substantial and
harmful effect upon that commerce. One need only examine the evidence which we
have discussed above to see that Congress may---as it has---prohibit racial
discrimination by motels serving travelers, however 'local' their operations
may appear.

Nor does the Act deprive appellant of liberty or property under the Fifth
Amendment. The commerce power invoked here by the Congress is a specific and
plenary one authorized by the Constitution itself. The only questions are: (1)
whether Congress had a rational basis for finding that racial discrimination
by motels affected commerce, and (2) if it had such a basis, whether the means
it selected to eliminate that evil are reasonable and appropriate. If they
are, appellant has no 'right' to select its guests as it sees fit, free from
governmental regulation.

There is nothing novel about such legislation. Thirty-two States now have it
on their books either by statute or executive order and many cities provide
such regulation. Some of these Acts go back fourscore years. It has been
repeatedly held by this Court that such laws do not violate the Due Process
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Perhaps the first such holding was in the
Civil Rights Cases themselves, where Mr. Justice Bradley for the Court
inferentially found that innkeepers, 'by the laws of all the States, so far as
we are aware, are bound, to the extent of their facilities, to furnish proper
accommodation to all unobjectionable persons who in good faith apply for
them.' 

We find no merit in the remainder of appellant's contentions, including that
of 'involuntary servitude.' As we have seen, 32 States prohibit racial
discrimination in public accommodations. These laws but codify the common-law
innkeeper rule which long predated the Thirteenth Amendment. It is difficult
to believe that the Amendment was intended to abrogate this principle. Indeed,
the opinion of the Court in the Civil Rights Cases is to the contrary as we
have seen, it having noted with approval the laws of 'all the States'
prohibiting discrimination. We could not say that the requirements of the Act
in this regard are in any way 'akin to African slavery.' 

We, therefore, conclude that the action of the Congress in the adoption of the
Act as applied here to a motel which concededly serves interstate travelers is
within the power granted it by the Commerce Clause of the Constitution, as
interpreted by this Court for 140 years. It may be argued that Congress could
have pursued other methods to eliminate the obstructions it found in
interstate commerce caused by racial discrimination. But this is a matter of
policy that rests entirely with the Congress not with the courts. How
obstructions in commerce may be removed--what means are to be employed--is
within the sound and exclusive discretion of the Congress. It is subject only
to one caveat--that the means chosen by it must be reasonably adapted to the
end permitted by the Constitution. We cannot say that its choice here was not
so adapted. The Constitution requires no more.

\newpage
