384 U.S. 641

86 S.Ct. 1717

16 L.Ed.2d 828

Nicholas de B. KATZENBACH, Attorney General of the United States, et al.,
Appellants,  
v.  
John P. MORGAN and Christine Morgan. NEW YORK CITY BOARD OF ELECTIONS, etc.,
Appellants, v. John P. MORGAN and Christine Morgan.

Nos. 847, 877.

Argued April 18, 1966.

Decided June 13, 1966.

[Syllabus from pages 641-642 intentionally omitted]

Sol. Gen. Thurgood Marshall and J. Lee Rankin, New York City, for appellants.

Alfred Avins, Memphis, Tenn., for appellees.

Rafael Hernandez Colon, Ponce, P.R., for Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, as
amicus curiae.

Jean M. Coon, Albany, N.Y., for State of New York, as amicus curiae.

Mr. Justice BRENNAN delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

These cases concern the constitutionality of § 4(e) of the Voting Rights Act
of 1965.1 That law, in the respects pertinent in these cases, provides that no
person who has successfully completed the sixth primary grade in a public
school in, or a private school accredited by, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
in which the language of instruction was other than English shall be denied
the right to vote in any election because of his inability to read or write
English. Appellees, registered voters in New York City, brought this suit to
challenge the constitutionality of § 4(e) insofar as it pro tanto prohibits
the enforcement of the election laws of New York2 requiring an ability to read
and write English as a condition of voting. Under these laws many of the
several hundred thousand New York City residents who have migrated there from
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico had previously been denied the right to vote,
and appellees attack § 4(e) insofar as it would enable many of these citizens
to vote.3 Pursuant to § 14(b) of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, appellees
commenced this proceeding in the District Court for the District of Columbia
seeking a declaration that § 4(e) is invalid and an injunction prohibiting
appellants, the Attorney General of the United States and the New York City
Board of Elections, from either enforcing or complying with s 4(e).4 A three-
judge district court was designated. 28 U.S.C. §§ 2282, 2284 (1964 ed.). Upon
cross motions for summary judgment, that court, one judge dissenting, granted
the declaratory and injunctive relief appellees sought. The court held that in
enacting § 4(e) Congress exceeded the powers granted to it by the Constitution
and therefore usurped powers reserved to the States by the Tenth Amendment.
247 F.Supp. 196. Appeals were taken directly to this Court, 28 U.S.C. §§ 1252,
1253 (1964 ed.) and we noted probable jurisdiction. 382 U.S. 1007, 86 S.Ct.
621, 15 L.Ed.2d 524. We reverse. We hold that, in the application challenged
in these cases, § 4(e) is a proper exercise of the powers granted to Congress
by § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment5 and that by force of the Supremacy Clause,
Article VI, the New York English literacy requirement cannot be enforced to
the extent that it is inconsistent with § 4(e).

2

Under the distribution of powers effected by the Constitution, the States
establish qualifications for voting for state officers, and the qualifications
established by the States for voting for members of the most numerous branch
of the state legislature also determine who may vote for United States
Representatives and Senators, Art. I, § 2; Seventeenth Amendment; Ex parte
Yarbrough, 110 U.S. 651, 663, 4 S.Ct. 152, 28 L.Ed. 274. But, of course, the
States have no power to grant or withhold the franchise on conditions that are
forbidden by the Fourteenth Amendment, or any other provision of the
Constitution. Such exercises of state power are no more immune to the
limitations of the Fourteenth Amendment than any other state action. The Equal
Protection Clause itself has been held to forbid some state laws that restrict
the right to vote.6

3

The Attorney General of the State of New York argues that an exercise of
congressional power under § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment that prohibits the
enforcement of a state law can only be sustained if the judicial branch
determines that the state law is prohibited by the provisions of the Amendment
that Congress sought to enforce. More specifically, he urges that § 4(e)
cannot be sustained as appropriate legislation to enforce the Equal Protection
Clause unless the judiciary decides--even with the guidance of a congressional
judgment--that the application of the English literacy requirement prohibited
by § 4(e) is forbidden by the Equal Protection Clause itself. We disagree.
Neither the language nor history of § 5 supports such a construction.7 As was
said with regard to § 5 in Ex parte Com. of Virginia, 100 U.S. 339, 345, 25
L.Ed. 676. 'It is the power of Congress which has been enlarged. Congress is
authorized to enforce the prohibitions by appropriate legislation. Some
legislation is contemplated to make the amendments fully effective.' A
construction of § 5 that would require a judicial determination that the
enforcement of the state law precluded by Congress violated the Amendment, as
a condition of sustaining the congressional enactment, would depreciate both
congressional resourcefulness and congressional responsibility for
implementing the Amendment.8 It would confine the legislative power in this
context to the insignificant role of abrogating only those state laws that the
judicial branch was prepared to adjudge unconstitutional, or of merely
informing the judgment of the judiciary by particularizing the 'majestic
generalities' of § 1 of the Amendment. See Fay v. People of State of New York,
332 U.S. 261, 282--284, 67 S.Ct. 1613, 1624--1625, 91 L.Ed. 2043.

4

Thus our task in this case is not to determine whether the New York English
literacy requirement as applied to deny the right to vote to a person who
successfully completed the sixth grade in a Puerto Rican school violates the
Equal Protection Clause. Accordingly, our decision in Lassiter v. Northampton
County Bd. of Election, 360 U.S. 45, 79 S.Ct. 985, 3 L.Ed.2d 1072, sustaining
the North Carolina English literacy requirement as not in all circumstances
prohibited by the first sections of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments,
is inapposite. Compare also Guinn v. United States, 238 U.S. 347, 366, 35
S.Ct. 926, 931, 59 L.Ed. 1340; Camacho v. Doe, 31 Misc.2d 692, 221 N.Y.S.2d
262 (1958), aff'd 7 N.Y.2d 762, 194 N.Y.S.2d 33, 163 N.E.2d 140 (1959);
Camacho v. Rogers, 199 F.Supp. 155 (D.C.S.D.N.Y.1961). Lassiter did not
present the question before us here: Without regard to whether the judiciary
would find that the Equal Protection Clause itself nullifies New York's
English literacy requirement as so applied, could Congress prohibit the
enforcement of the state law by legislating under § 5 of the Fourteenth
Amendment? In answering this question, our task is limited to determining
whether such legislation is, as required by § 5, appropriate legislation to
enforce the Equal Protection Clause.

5

By including § 5 the draftsmen sought to grant to Congress, by a specific
provision applicable to the Fourteenth Amendment, the same broad powers
expressed in the Necessary and Proper Clause, Art. I, § 8, cl. 18.9 The
classic formulation of the reach of those powers was established by Chief
Justice Marshall in McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 421, 4 L.Ed. 579:

6

'Let the end be legitimate, let it be within the scope of the constitution,
and all means which are appropriate, which are plainly adapted to that end,
which are not prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the
constitution, are constitutional.

7

Ex parte Com. of Virginia, 100 U.S., at 345--346, 25 L.Ed. 676, decided 12
years after the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, held that congressional
power under § 5 had this same broad scope:

8

'Whatever legislation is appropriate, that is, adapted to carry out the
objects the amendments have in view, whatever tends to enforce submission to
the prohibitions they contain, and to secure to all persons the enjoyment of
perfect equality of civil rights and the equal protection of the laws against
State denial or invasion, if not prohibited, is brought within the domain of
congressional power.' Strauder v. West Virginia, 100 U.S. 303, 311, 25 L.Ed.
664; Virginia v. Rives, 100 U.S. 313, 318, 25 L.Ed. 667. Section 2 of the
Fifteenth Amendment grants Congress a similar power to enforce by 'appropriate
legislation' the provisions of that amendment; and we recently held in State
of South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U.S. 301, 326, 86 S.Ct. 803, 817, 15
L.Ed.2d 769, that '(t)he basic test to be applied in a case involving § 2 of
the Fifteenth Amendment is the same as in all cases concerning the express
powers of Congress with relation to the reserved powers of the States.' That
test was identified as the one formulated in McCulloch v. Maryland. See also
James Everard's Breweries v. Day, 265 U.S. 545, 558--559, 44 S.Ct. 628, 631,
68 L.Ed. 1174 (Eighteenth Amendment). Thus the McCulloch v. Maryland standard
is the measure of what constitutes 'appropriate legislation' under § 5 of the
Fourteenth Amendment. Correctly viewed, § 5 is a positive grant of legislative
power authorizing Congress to exercise its discretion in determining whether
and what legislation is needed to secure the guarantees of the Fourteenth
Amendment.

9

We therefore proceed to the consideration whether § 4(e) is 'appropriate
legislation' to enforce the Equal Protection Clause, that is, under the
McCulloch v. Maryland standard, whether § 4(e) may be regarded as an enactment
to enforce the Equal Protection Clause, whether it is 'plainly adapted to that
end' and whether it is not prohibited by but is consistent with 'the letter
and spirit of the constitution.'10

10

There can be no doubt that § 4(e) may be regarded as an enactment to enforce
the Equal Protection Clause. Congress explicitly declared that it enacted §
4(e) 'to secure the rights under the fourteenth amendment of persons educated
in American-flag schools in which the predominant classroom language was other
than English.' The persons referred to include those who have migrated from
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico to New York and who have been denied the right
to vote because of their inability to read and write English, and the
Fourteenth Amendment rights referred to include those emanating from the Equal
Protection Clause. More specifically, § 4(e) may be viewed as a measure to
secure for the Puerto Rican community residing in New York nondiscriminatory
treatment by government--both in the imposition of voting qualifications and
the provision or administration of governmental services, such as public
schools, public housing and law enforcement.

11

Section 4(e) may be readily seen as 'plainly adapted' to furthering these aims
of the Equal Protection Clause. The practical effect of § 4(e) is to prohibit
New York from denying the right to vote to large segments of its Puerto Rican
community. Congress has thus prohibited the State from denying to that
community the right that is 'preservative of all rights.' Yick Wo v. Hopkins,
118 U.S. 356, 370, 6 S.Ct. 1064, 1071, 30 L.Ed. 220. This enhanced political
power will be helpful in gaining nondiscriminatory treatment in public
services for the entire Puerto Rican community.11 Section 4(e) thereby enables
the Puerto Rican minority better to obtain 'perfect equality of civil rights
and the equal protection of the laws.' It was well within congressional
authority to say that this need of the Puerto Rican minority for the vote
warranted federal intrusion upon any state interests served by the English
literacy requirement. It was for Congress, as the branch that made this
judgment, to assess and weigh the various conflicting considerations--the risk
or pervasiveness of the discrimination in governmental services, the
effectiveness of eliminating the state restriction on the right to vote as a
means of dealing with the evil, the adequacy or availability of alternative
remedies, and the nature and significance of the state interests that would be
affected by the nullification of the English literacy requirement as applied
to residents who have successfully completed the sixth grade in a Puerto Rican
school. It is not for us to review the congressional resolution of these
factors. It is enough that we be able to perceive a basis upon which the
Congress might resolve the conflict as it did. There plainly was such a basis
to support § 4(e) in the application in question in this case. Any contrary
conclusion would require us to be blind to the realities familiar to the
legislators.12

12

The result is no different if we confine our inquiry to the question whether §
4(e) was merely legislation aimed at the elimination of an invidious
discrimination in establishing voter qualifications. We are told that New
York's English literacy requirement originated in the desire to provide an
incentive for non-English speaking immigrants to learn the English language
and in order to assure the intelligent exercise of the franchise. Yet Congress
might well have questioned, in light of the many exemptions provided,13 and
some evidence suggesting that prejudice played a prominent role in the
enactment of the requirement,14 whether these were actually the interests
being served. Congress might have also questioned whether denial of a right
deemed so precious and fundamental in our society was a necessary or
appropriate means of encouraging persons to learn English, or of furthering
the goal of an intelligent exercise of the franchise.15 Finally, Congress
might well have concluded that as a means of furthering the intelligent
exercise of the franchise, an ability to read or understand Spanish is as
effective as ability to read English for those to whom Spanish-language
newspapers and Spanish-language radio and television programs are available to
inform them of election issues and governmental affairs.16 Since Congress
undertook to legislate so as to preclude the enforcement of the state law, and
did so in the context of a general appraisal of literacy requirements for
voting, see State of South Carolina v. Katzenbach, supra, to which it brought
a specially informed legislative competence,17 it was Congress' prerogative to
weigh these competing considerations. Here again, it is enough that we
perceive a basis upon which Congress might predicate a judgment that the
application of New York's English literacy requirement to deny the right to
vote to a person with a sixth grade education in Puerto Rican schools in which
the language of instruction was other than English constituted an invidious
discrimination in violation of the Equal Protection Clause.

13

There remains the question whether the congressional remedies adopted in §
4(e) constitute means which are not prohibited by, but are consistent 'with
the letter and spirit of the constitution.' The only respect in which
appellees contend that § 4(e) fails in this regard is that the section itself
works an invidious discrimination in violation of the Fifth Amendment by
prohibiting the enforcement of the English literacy requirement only for those
educated in American-flag schools (schools located within United States
jurisdiction) in which the language of instruction was other than English, and
not for those educated in schools beyond the territorial limits of the United
States in which the language of instruction was also other than English. This
is not a complaint that Congress, in enacting § 4(e), has unconstitutionally
denied or diluted anyone's right to vote but rather that Congress violated the
Constitution by not extending the relief effected in § 4(e) to those educated
in non-American-flag schools. We need not pause to determine whether appellees
have a sufficient personal interest to have § 4(e) invalidated on this ground,
see generally United States v. Raines, 362 U.S. 17, 80 S.Ct. 519, 4 L.Ed.2d
524, since the argument, in our view, falls on the merits.

14

Section 4(e) does not restrict or deny the franchise but in effect extends the
franchise to persons who otherwise would be denied it by state law. Thus we
need not decide whether a state literacy law conditioning the right to vote on
achieving a certain level of education in an American-flag school (regardless
of the language of instruction) discriminates invidiously against those
educated in non-American-flag schools. We need only decide whether the
challenged limitation on the relief effected in § 4(e) was permissible. In
deciding that question, the principle that calls for the closest scrutiny of
distinctions in laws denying fundamental rights, see n. 15, supra, is
inapplicable; for the distinction challenged by appellees is presented only as
a limitation on a reform measure aimed at eliminating an existing barrier to
the exercise of the franchise. Rather, in deciding the constitutional
propriety of the limitations in such a reform measure we are guided by the
familiar principles that a 'statute is not invalid under the Constitution
because it might have gone farther than it did,' Roschen v. Ward, 279 U.S.
337, 339, 49 S.Ct. 336, 73 L.Ed. 722, that a legislature need not 'strike at
all evils at the same time.' Semler v. Oregon State Board of Dental Examiners,
294 U.S. 608, 610, 55 S.Ct. 570, 571, 79 L.Ed. 1086 and that 'reform may take
one step at a time, addressing itself to the phase of the problem which seems
most acute to the legislative mind,' Williamson v. Lee Optical Co., 348 U.S.
483, 489, 75 S.Ct. 461, 465, 99 L.Ed. 563.

15

Guided by these principles, we are satisfied that appellees' challenge to this
limitation in § 4(e) is without merit. In the context of the case before us,
the congressional choice to limit the relief effected in § 4(e) may, for
example, reflect Congress' greater familiarity with the quality of instruction
in American-flag schools,18 a recognition of the unique historic relationship
between the Congress and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,19 an awareness of
the Federal Government's acceptance of the desirability of the use of Spanish
as the language of instruction in Commonwealth schools,20 and the fact that
Congress has fostered policies encouraging migration from the Commonwealth to
the States.21 We have no occasion to determine in this case whether such
factors would justify a similar distinction embodied in a voting-qualification
law that denied the franchise to persons educated in non-American-flag
schools. We hold only that the limitation on relief effected in § 4(e) does
not constitute a forbidden discrimination since these factors might well have
been the basis for the decision of Congress to go 'no farther than it did.'

16

We therefore conclude that § 4(e), in the application challenged in this case,
is appropriate legislation to enforce the Equal Protection Clause and that the
judgment of the District Court must be and hereby is reversed.

17

Reversed.

18

Mr. Justice DOUGLAS joins the Court's opinion except for the discussion, at
pp. 656--658, of the question whether the congressional remedies adopted in §
4(e) constitute means which are not prohibited by, but are consistent with
'the letter and spirit of the constitution.' On that Mr. Justice HARLAN, whom
Mr. Justice STEWART joins, dissenting.

19

Worthy as its purposes may be thought by many, I do not see how § 4(e) of the
Voting Rights Act of 1965, 79 Stat. 439, 42 U.S.C. § 1973b(e) (1964 ed. Supp.
I), can be sustained except at the sacrifice of fundamentals in the American
constitutional system--the separation between the legislative and judicial
function and the boundaries between federal and state political authority. By
the same token I think that the validity of New York's literacy test, a
question which the Court considers only in the context of the federal statute,
must be upheld. It will conduce to analytical clarity if I discuss the second
issue first.

I.

20

The Cardona Case (No. 673).

21

This case presents a straightforward Equal Protection problem. Appellant, a
resident and citizen of New York, sought to register to vote but was refused
registration because she failed to meet the New York English literacy
qualification respecting eligibility for the franchise.1 She maintained that
although she could not read or write English, she had been born and educated
in Puerto Rico and was literate in Spanish. She alleges that New York's
statute requiring satisfaction of an English literacy test is an arbitrary and
irrational classification that violates the Equal Protection Clause at least
as applied to someone who, like herself, is literate in Spanish.

22

Any analysis of this problem must begin with the established rule of law that
the franchise is essentially a matter of state concern, Minor v. Happersett,
21 Wall. 162; Lassiter v. Northampton Election Bd., 360 U.S. 45, 79 S.Ct. 985,
3 L.Ed.2d 1072, subject only to the overriding requirements of various federal
constitutional provisions dealing with the franchise, e.g., the Fifteenth,
Seventeenth, Nineteenth, and Twenty-fourth Amendments,2 and, as more recently
decided, to the general principles of the Fourteenth Amendment. Reynolds v.
Sims, 377 U.S. 533, 84 S.Ct. 1362, 12 L.Ed.2d 506; Carrington v. Rash, 380
U.S. 89, 85 S.Ct. 775, 13 L.Ed.2d 675.

23

The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, which alone concerns
us here, forbids a State from arbitrarily discriminating among different
classes of persons. Of course it has always been recognized that nearly all
legislation involves some sort of classification, and the equal protection
test applied by this Court is a narrow one: a state enactment or practice may
be struck down under the clause only if it cannot be justified as founded upon
a rational and permissible state policy. See, e.g., Powell v. Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, 127 U.S. 678, 8 S.Ct. 992, 32 L.Ed. 253; Lindsley v. Natural
Carbonic Gas Co., 220 U.S. 61, 31 S.Ct. 337, 55 L.Ed. 369; Walters v. City of
St. Louis, 347 U.S. 231, 74 S.Ct. 505, 98 L.Ed. 660.

24

It is suggested that a different and broader equal protection standard applies
in cases where 'fundamental liberties and rights are threatened,' see 384 U.S.
p. 655, 86 S.Ct. p. 1726, 16 L.Ed.2d p. 838, note 15; dissenting opinion of
Douglas, J., in Cardona, 384 U.S. pp. 676--677, 86 S.Ct. pp. 1730--1731, 16
L.Ed.2d pp. 851--852, which would require a State to show a need greater than
mere rational policy to justify classifications in this area. No such dual-
level test has ever been articulated by this Court, and I do not believe that
any such approach is consistent with the purposes of the Equal Protection
Clause, with the overwhelming weight of authority, or with well-established
principles of federalism which underlie the Equal Protection Clause.

25

Thus for me, applying the basic equal protection standard, the issue in this
case is whether New York has shown that its English-language literacy test is
reasonably designed to serve a legitimate state interest. I think that it has.

26

In 1959, in Lassiter v. Northampton Election Bd., supra, this Court dealt with
substantially the same question and resolved it unanimously in favor of the
legitimacy of a state literacy qualification. There a North Carolina English
literacy test was challenged. We held that there was 'wide scope' for State
qualifications of this sort. 360 U.S., at 51, 79 S.Ct. 985, 3 L.Ed.2d 1072.
Dealing with literacy tests generally, the Court there held:

27

'The ability to read and write * * * has some relation to standards designed
to promote intelligent use of the ballot. * * * Literacy and intelligence are
obviously not synonymous. Illiterate people may be intelligent voters. Yet in
our society where newspapers, periodicals, books, and other printed matter
canvass and debate campaign issues, a State might conclude that only those who
are literate should exercise the franchise. * * * It was said last century in
Massachusetts that a literacy test was designed to insure an 'independent and
intelligent' exercise of the right of suffrage. Stone v. Smith, 159 Mass. 413
--414, 34 N.E. 521. North Carolina agrees. We do not sit in judgment on the
wisdom of that policy. We cannot say, however, that it is not an allowable one
measured by constitutional standards.' 360 U.S., at 51 53, 79 S.Ct. at 990.

28

I believe the same interests recounted in Lassiter indubitably point toward
upholding the rationality of the New York voting test. It is true that the
issue here is not so simply drawn between literacy is not so simply drawn
between literacy per se and illiteracy. Appellant alleges that she is literate
in Spanish, and that she studied American history and government in United
States Spanish-speaking schools in Puerto Rico. She alleges further that she
is 'a regular reader of the New York City Spanish-language daily newspapers
and other periodicals, which * * * provide proportionately more coverage of
government and politics than do most English-language newspapers,' and that
she listens to Spanish-language radio broadcasts in New York which provide
full treatment of governmental and political news. It is thus maintained that
whatever may be the validity of literacy tests per se as a condition of
voting, application of such a test to one literate in Spanish, in the context
of the large and politically significant Spanish-speaking community in New
York, serves no legitimate state interest, and is thus an arbitrary
classification that violates the Equal Protection Clause.

29

Although to be sure there is a difference between a totally illiterate person
and one who is literate in a foreign tongue, I do not believe that this added
factor vitiates the constitutionality of the New York statute. Accepting
appellant's allegations as true, it is nevertheless also true that the range
of material available to a resident of New York literate only in Spanish is
much more limited than what is available to an English-speaking resident, that
the business of national, state, and local government is conducted in English,
and that propositions, amendments, and offices for which candidates are
running listed on the ballot are likewise in English. It is also true that
most candidates, certainly those campaigning on a national or statewide level
make their speeches in English. New York may justifiably want its voters to be
able to understand candidates directly rather than through possibly imprecise
translations or summaries reported in a limited number of Spanish news media.
It is noteworthy that the Federal Government requires literacy in English as a
prerequisite to naturalization, 66 Stat. 239, 8 U.S.C. § 1423 (1964 ed.),
attesting to the national view of its importance as a prerequisite to full
integration into the American political community. Relevant too is the fact
that the New York English test is not complex,3 that it is fairly
administered,4 and that New York maintains free adult education classes which
appellant and members of her class are encouraged to attend.5 Given the
State's legitimate concern with promoting and safeguarding the intelligent use
of the ballot, and given also New York's long experience with the process of
integrating non-English-speaking residents into the mainstream of American
life, I do not see how it can be said that this qualification for suffrage is
unconstitutional. I would uphold the validity of the New York statute, unless
the federal statute prevents that result, the question to which I now turn.

II.

The Morgan Cases (Nos. 847 and 877).

30

These cases involve the same New York suffrage restriction discussed above,
but the challenge here comes not in the form of a suit to enjoin enforcement
of the state statute, but in a test of the constitutionality of a federal
enactment which declares that 'to secure the rights under the fourteenth
amendment of persons educated in American-flag schools in which the
predominant classroom language was other than English, it is necessary to
prohibit the States from conditioning the right to vote of such persons on
ability to read, write, understand, or interpret any matter in the English
language.' Section 4(e) of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Section 4(e)
declares that anyone who has successfully completed six grades of schooling in
an 'American-flag' school, in which the primary language is not English, shall
not be denied the right to vote because of an inability to satisfy an English
literacy test.6 Although the statute is framed in general terms, so far as has
been shown it applies in actual effect only to citizens of Puerto Rican
background, and the Court so treats it.

31

The pivotal question in this instance is what effect the added factor of a
congressional enactment has on the straight equal protection argument dealt
with above. The Court declares that since § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment7
gives to the Congress power to 'enforce' the prohibitions of the Amendment by
'appropriate' legislation, the test for judicial review of any congressional
determination in this area is simply one of rationality; that is, in effect,
was Congress acting rationally in declaring that the New York statute is
irrational? Although § 5 most certainly does give to the Congress wide powers
in the field of devising remedial legislation to effectuate the Amendment's
prohibition on arbitrary state action, Ex parte Commonwealth of Virginia, 100
U.S. 339, 25 L.Ed. 676. I believe the Court has confused the issue of how much
enforcement power Congress possesses under § 5 with the distinct issue of what
questions are appropriate for congressional determination and what questions
are essentially judicial in nature.

32

When recognized state violations of federal constitutional standards have
occurred, Congress is of course empowered by § 5 to take appropriate remedial
measures to redress and prevent the wrongs. See Strauder v. West Virginia, 100
U.S. 303, 310, 25 L.Ed. 664. But it is a judicial question whether the
condition with which Congress has thus sought to deal is in truth an
infringement of the Constitution, something that is the necessary prerequisite
to bringing the § 5 power into play at all. Thus, in Ex parte Virginia, supra,
involving a federal statute making it a federal crime to disqualify anyone
from jury service because of race, the Court first held as a matter of
constitutional law that 'the Fourteenth Amendment secures, among other civil
rights, to colored men, when charged with criminal offences against a State,
an impartial jury trial, by jurors indifferently selected or chosen without
discrimination against such jurors because of their color.' 100 U.S. at 345,
25 L.Ed. 676. Only then did the Court hold that to enforce this prohibition
upon state discrimination, Congress could enact a criminal statute of the type
under consideration. See also Clyatt v. United States, 197 U.S. 207, 25 S.Ct.
429, 49 L.Ed. 726, sustaining the constitutionality of the antipeonage laws,
14 Stat. 546, now 42 U.S.C. § 1994 (1964 ed.), under the Enforcement Clause of
the Thirteenth Amendment.

33

A more recent Fifteenth Amendment case also serves to illustrate this
distinction. In State of South Carolina v. Katzenbach, 383 U.S. 301, 86 S.Ct.
803, 15 L.Ed.2d 769, decided earlier this Term, we held certain remedial
sections of this Voting Rights Act of 1965 constitutional under the Fifteenth
Amendment, which is directed against deprivations of the right to vote on
account of race. In enacting those sections of the Voting Rights Act the
Congress made a detailed investigation of various state practices that had
been used to deprive Negroes of the franchise. See 383 U.S., at 308--315, 86
S.Ct. at 808--812\. In passing upon the remedial provisions, we reviewed first
the 'voluminous legislative history' as well as judicial precedents supporting
the basic congressional finding that the clear commands of the Fifteenth
Amendment had been infringed by various state subterfuges. See 383 U.S., at
309, 329--330, 333--334, 86 S.Ct. at 808, 819, 821--822\. Given the existence
of the evil, we held the remedial steps taken by the legislature under the
Enforcement Clause of the Fifteenth Amendment to be a justifiable exercise of
congressional initiative.

34

Section 4(e), however, presents a significantly different type of
congressional enactment. The question here is not whether the statute is
appropriate remedial legislation to cure an established violation of a
constitutional command, but whether there has in fact been an infringement of
that constitutional command, that is, whether a particular state practice or,
as here, a statute is so arbitrary or irrational as to offend the command of
the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. That question is one
for the judicial branch ultimately to determine. Were the rule otherwise,
Congress would be able to qualify this Court's constitutional decisions under
the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments let alone those under other provisions
of the Constitution, by resorting to congressional power under the Necessary
and Proper Clause. In view of this Court's holding in Lassiter, supra, that an
English literacy test is a permissible exercise of state supervision over its
franchise, I do not think it is open to Congress to limit the effect of that
decision as it has undertaken to do by § 4(e). In effect the Court reads § 5
of the Fourteenth Amendment as giving Congress the power to define the
substantive scope of the Amendment. If that indeed be the true reach of § 5,
then I do not see why Congress should not be able as well to exercise its § 5
'discretion' by enacting statutes so as in effect to dilute equal protection
and due process decisions of this Court. In all such cases there is room for
reasonable men to differ as to whether or not a denial of equal protection or
due process has occurred, and the final decision is one of judgment. Until
today this judgment has always been one for the judiciary to resolve.

35

I do not mean to suggest in what has been said that a legislative judgment of
the type incorporated in § 4(e) is without any force whatsoever. Decisions on
questions of equal protection and due process are based not on abstract logic,
but on empirical foundations. To the extent 'legislative facts' are relevant
to a judicial determination, Congress is well equipped to investigate them,
and such determinations are of course entitled to due respect.8 In State of
South Carolina v. Katzenbach, supra, such legislative findings were made to
show that racial discrimination in voting was actually ocurring. Similarly, in
Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States, 379 U.S. 241, 85 S.Ct. 348, 13
L.Ed.2d 258, and Katzenbach v. McClung, 379 U.S. 294, 85 S.Ct. 377, 13 L.Ed.2d
290, this Court upheld Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 under the
Commerce Clause. There again the congressional determination that racial
discrimination in a clearly defined group of public accommodations did
effectively impede interstate commerce was based on 'voluminous testimony,'
379 U.S., at 253, 85 S.Ct. at 355, which had been put before the Congress and
in the context of which it passed remedial legislation.

36

But no such factual data provide a legislative record supporting § 4(e)9 by
way of showing that Spanish-speaking citizens are fully as capable of making
informed decisions in a New York election as are English-speaking citizens.
Nor was there any showing whatever to support the Court's alternative argument
that § 4(e) should be viewed as but a remedial measure designed to cure or
assure against unconstitutional discrimination of other varieties, e.g., in
'public schools, public housing and law enforcement,' 384 U.S., p. 652, 86
S.Ct., p. 1724, to which Puerto Rican minorities might be subject in such
communities as New York. There is simply no legislative record supporting such
hypothesized discrimination of the sort we have hitherto insisted upon when
congressional power is brought to bear on constitutionally reserved state
concerns. See Heart of Atlanta Motel, supra; State of South Carolina v.
Katzenbach, supra.

37

Thus, we have here not a matter of giving defendce to a congressional
estimate, based on its determination of legislative facts, bearing upon the
validity vel non of a statute, but rather what can at most be called a
legislative announcement that Congress believes a state law to entail an
unconstitutional deprivation of equal protection. Although this kind of
declaration is of course entitled to the most respectful consideration, coming
as it does from a concurrent branch and one that is knowledgeable in matters
of popular political participation, I do not believe it lessens our
responsibility to decide the fundamental issue of whether in fact the state
enactment violates federal constitutional rights.

38

In assessing the deference we should give to this kind of congressional
expression of policy, it is relevant that the judiciary has always given to
congressional enactments a presumption of validity. The Propeller Genesee
Chief v. Fitzhugh, 12 How. 443, 457--458, 53 U.S. 443, 13 L.Ed. 1058. However,
it is also a canon of judicial review that state statutes are given a similar
presumption, Butler v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania 10 How. 402, 415, 51 U.S.
402, 13 L.Ed. 472. Whichever way this case is decided, one statute will be
rendered inoperative in whole or in part, and although it has been suggested
that this Court should give somewhat more deference to Congress than to a
state legislature,10 such a simple weighing of presumptions is hardly a
satisfying way of resolving a matter that touches the distribution of state
and federal power in an area so sensitive as that of the regulation of the
franchise. Rather it should be recognized that while the Fourteenth Amendment
is a 'brooding omnipresence' over all state legislation, the substantive
matters which it touches are all within the primary legislative competence of
the States. Federal authority, legislative no less than judicial, does not
intrude unless there has been a denial by state action of Fourteenth Amendment
limitations, in this instance a denial of equal protection. At least in the
area of primary state concern a state statute that passes constitutional
muster under the judicial standard of rationality should not be permitted to
be set at naught by a mere contrary congressional pronouncement unsupported by
a legislative record justifying that conclusion.

39

To deny the effectiveness of this congressional enactment is not of course to
disparage Congess' exertion of authority in the field of civil rights; it is
simply to recognize that the Legislative Branch like the other branches of
federal authority is subject to the governmental boundaries set by the
Constitution. To hold, on this record, that § 4(e) overrides the New York
literacy requirement seems to me tantamount to allowing the Fourteenth
Amendment to swallow the State's constitutionally ordained primary authority
in this field. For if Congress by what, as here, amounts to mere ipse dixit
can set that otherwise permissible requirement partially at naught I see no
reason why it could not also substitute its judgment for that of the States in
other fields of their exclusive primary competence as well.

40

I would affirm the judgments in each of these cases.11

1

The full text of § 4(e) is as follows:

'(1) Congress hereby declares that to secure the rights under the fourteenth
amendment of persons educated in American-flag schools in which the
predominant classroom language was other than English, it is necessary to
prohibit the States from conditioning the right to vote of such persons on
ability to read, write, understand, or interpret any matter in the English
language.

'(2) No person who demonstrates that he has successfully completed the sixth
primary grade in a public school in, or a private school accredited by, any
State or territory, the District of Columbia, or the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico in which the predominant classroom language was other than English, shall
be denied the right to vote in any Federal, State, or local election because
of his inability to read, write, understand, or interpret any matter in the
English language, except that in States in which State law provides that a
different level of education is presumptive of literacy, he shall demonstrate
that he has successfully completed an equivalent level of education in a
public school in, or a private school accredited by, any State or territory,
the District of Columbia, or the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico in which the
predominant classroom language was other than English.' 79 Stat. 439, 42
U.S.C. § 1973b(e) (1964 ed., Supp. I).

2

Article II, § 1, of the New York Constitution provides, in pertinent part:

'Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, after January first, one thousand
nine hundred twenty-two, no person shall become entitled to vote by attaining
majority, by naturalization or otherwise, unless such person is also able,
except for physical disability, to read and write English.'

Section 150 of the New York Election Law, McKinney's Consol.Laws, c. 17,
provides, in pertinent part:

'* * * In the case of a person who became entitled to vote in this state by
attaining majority, by naturalization or otherwise after January first,
nineteen hundred twenty-two, such person must, in addition to the foregoing
provisions, be able, except for physical disability, to read and write
English. A 'new voter,' within the meaning of this article, is a person who,
if he is entitled to vote in this state, shall have become so entitled on or
after January first, nineteen hundred twenty-two, and who has not already
voted at a general election in the state of New York after making proof of
ability to read and write English, in the manner provided in section one
hundred sixty-eight.'

Section 168 of the New York Election Law provides, in pertinent part:

'1. The board of regents of the state of New York shall make provisions for
the giving of literacy tests.

'2. * * * But a new voter may present as evidence of literacy a certificate or
diploma showing that he has completed the work up to and including the sixth
grade of an approved elementary school or of an approved higher school in
which English is the language of instruction or a certificate or diploma
showing that he has completed the work up to and including the sixth grade in
a public school or a private school accredited by the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico in which school instruction is carried on predominantly in the English
language or a matriculation card issued by a college or university to a
student then at such institution or a certificate or a letter signed by an
official of the university or college certifying to such attendance.'

Section 168 of the Election Law as it now reads was enacted while § 4(e) was
under consideration in Congress. See 111 Cong.Rec. 19376--19377\. The prior
law required the successful completion of the eighth rather than the sixth
grade in a school in which the language of instruction was English.

3

This limitation on appellees' challenge to § 4(e), and thus on the scope of
our inquiry, does not distort the primary intent of § 4(e). The measure as
sponsored in the Senate by Senators Javits and Kennedy and in the House by
Representatives Gilbert and Ryan, all of New York, for the explicit purpose of
dealing with the disenfranchisement of large segments of the Puerto Rican
population in New York. Throughout the congressional debate it was repeatedly
acknowledged that § 4(e) had particular reference to the Puerto Rican
population in New York. That situation was the almost exclusive subject of
discussion. See 111 Cong.Rec. 11028, 11060--11074, 15666, 16235--16245, 16282
--16283, 19192--19201, 19375--19378; see also Voting Rights, Hearings before
Subcommittee No. 5 of the House Committee on the Judiciary on H.R. 6400, 89th
Cong., 1st Sess., 100--101, 420--421, 508--517 (1965). The Solicitor General
informs us in his brief to this Court, that in all probability the practical
effect of § 4(e) will be limited to enfranchising those educated in Puerto
Rican schools. He advises us that, aside from the schools in the Commonwealth
of Puerto Rico, there are no public or parochial schools in the territorial
limits of the United States in which the predominant language of instruction
is other than English and which would have generally been attended by persons
who are otherwise qualified to vote save for their lack of literacy in
English.

4

Section 14(b) provides, in pertinent part:

'No court other than the District Court for the District of Columbia * * *
shall have jurisdiction to issue * * * any restraining order or temporary or
permanent injunction against the * * * enforcement of any provision of this
Act or any action of any Federal officer or employee pursuant hereto.' 79
Stat. 445, 42 U.S.C. § 1973l(b) (1964 ed., Supp. I).

The Attorney General of the United States was initially named as the sole
defendant. The New York City Board of Elections was joined as a defendant
after it publicly announced its intention to comply with § 4(e); it has taken
the position in these proceedings that § 4(e) is a proper exercise of
congressional power. The Attorney General of the State of New York has
participated as amicus curiae in the proceedings below and in this Court,
urging § 4(e) be declared unconstitutional. The United States was granted
leave to intervene as a defendant, 28 U.S.C. § 2403 (1964 ed.); Fed.Rule
Civ.Proc. 24(a).

5

'Section 5. The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate
legislation, the provisions of this article.'

It is therefore unnecessary for us to consider whether § 4(e) could be
sustained as an exercise of power under the Territorial Clause, Art. IV, § 3;
see dissenting opinion of Judge McGowan below, 247 F.Supp., at 204; or as a
measure to discharge certain treaty obligations of the United States, see
Treaty of Paris of 1898, 30 Stat. 1754, 1759; United Nations Charter, Articles
55 and 56, 59 Stat. 1033; Art. I, § 8, cl. 18. Nor need we consider whether §
4(e) could be sustained insofar as it relates to the election of federal
officers as an exercise of congressional power under Art. I, § 4, see Minor v.
Happersett, 21 Wall. 162, 171, 22 L.Ed. 627; United States v. Classic, 313
U.S. 299, 315, 61 S.Ct. 1031, 1037, 85 L.Ed. 1368; Literacy Tests and Voter
Requirements in Federal and State Elections, Hearings before the Subcommittee
on Constitutional Rights of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary on S. 480,
S. 2750, and S. 2979, 87th Cong., 2d Sess., 302, 306 311 (1962) (brief of the
Attorney General); nor whether § 4(e) could be sustained, insofar as it
relates to the election of state officers, as an exercise of congressional
power to enforce the clause guaranteeing to each State a republican form of
government, Art. IV, § 4; Art. I, § 8, cl. 18.

6

Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections, 383 U.S. 663, 86 S.Ct. 1079, 16 L.Ed.2d
169; Carrington v. Rash, 380 U.S. 89, 85 S.Ct. 775, 13 L.Ed.2d 675. See also
United States v. Mississippi, 380 U.S. 128, 85 S.Ct. 808, 13 L.Ed.2d 717;
Louisiana v. United States, 380 U.S. 145, 151, 85 S.Ct. 817, 821, 13 L.Ed.2d
709; Lassiter v. Northampton County Bd. of Elections, 360 U.S. 45, 79 S.Ct.
985, 3 L.Ed.2d 1072; Pope v. Williams, 193 U.S. 621, 632 634, 24 S.Ct. 573,
575--576, 48 L.Ed. 817; Minor v. Happersett, 21 Wall. 162, 22 L.Ed. 627; cf.
Burns v. Richardson, 384 U.S. 73, at 92, 86 S.Ct. 1286, at 1296, 16 L.Ed.2d
376; Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533, 84 S.Ct. 1362, 12 L.Ed.2d 506.

7

For the historical evidence suggesting that the sponsors and supporters of the
Amendment were primarily interested in augmenting the power of Congress,
rather than the judiciary, see generally Frantz, Congressional Power to
Enforce the Fourteenth Amendment Against Private Acts, 73 Yale L.J. 1353, 1356
--1357; Harris, The Quest for Equality, 33--56 (1960); tenBroek, The
Antislavery Origins of the Fourteenth Amendment 187--217 (1951).

8

Senator Howard, in introducing the proposed Amendment to the Senate, described
§ 5 as 'a direct affirmative delegation of power to Congress,' and added:

'It casts upon Congress the responsibility of seeing to it, for the future,
that all the sections of the amendment are carried out in good faith, and that
no State infringes the rights of persons or property. I look upon this clause
as indispensable for the reason that it thus imposes upon Congress this power
and this duty. It enables Congress, in case the States shall enact laws in
conflict with the principles of the amendment, to correct that legislation by
a formal congressional enactment.' Cong. Globe, 39th Cong., 1st Sess., 2766,
2768 (1866).

This statement of § 5's purpose was not questioned by anyone in the course of
the debate. Flack, The Adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment 138 (1908).

9

In fact, earlier drafts of the proposed Amendment employed the 'necessary and
proper' terminology to describe the scope of congressional power under the
Amendment. See tenBroek, The Antislavery Origins of the Fourteenth Amendment
187--190 (1951). The substitution of the 'appropriate legislation' formula was
never thought to have the effect of diminishing the scope of this
congressional power. See, e.g., Cong.Globe, 42d Cong., 1st Sess., App. 83
(Representative Bingham, a principal draftsman of the Amendment and the
earlier proposals).

10

Contrary to the suggestion of the dissent, infra, 384 U.S. p. 668, 86 S.Ct. p.
1736, 16 L.Ed.2d p. 845, § 5 does not grant Congress power to exercise
discretion in the other direction and to enact 'statutes so as in effect to
dilute equal protection and due process decisions of this Court.' We emphasize
that Congress' power under § 5 is limited to adopting measures to enforce the
guarantees of the Amendment; § 5 grants Congress no power to restrict,
abrogate, or dilute these guarantees. Thus, for example, an enactment
authorizing the States to establish racially segregated systems of education
would not be--as required by § 5--a measure 'to enforce' the Equal Protection
Clause since that clause of its own force prohibits such state laws.

11

Cf. James Everard's Breweries v. Day, supra, which held that, under the
Enforcement Clause of the Eighteenth Amendment, Congress could prohibit the
prescription of intoxicating malt liquor for medicinal purposes even though
the Amendment itself only prohibited the manufacture and sale of intoxicating
liquors for beverage purposes. Cf. also the settled principle applied in the
Shreveport Case (Houston, E. & W.T.R. Co. v. United States, 234 U.S. 342, 34
S.Ct. 833, 58 L.Ed. 1341), and expressed in United States v. Darby, 312 U.S.
100, 118, 61 S.Ct. 451, 459, 85 L.Ed. 609, that the power of Congress to
regulate interstate commerce 'extends to those activities intrastate which so
affect interstate commerce or the exercise of the power of Congress over it as
to make regulation of them appropriate means to the attainment of a legitimate
end * * *.' Accord, Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States, 379 U.S. 241,
258, 85 S.Ct. 348, 358, 13 L.Ed.2d 258.

12

See, e.g., 111 Cong.Rec. 11061--11062, 11065--11066, 16240; Literacy Tests and
Voter Requirements in Federal and State Elections, Senate Hearings, n. 5,
supra, 507--508.

13

The principal exemption complained of is that for persons who had been
eligible to vote before January 1, 1922. See n. 2, supra.

14

This evidence consists in part of statements made in the Constitutional
Convention first considering the English literacy requirement, such as the
following made by the sponsor of the measure: 'More precious even than the
forms of government are the mental qualities of our race. While those stand
unimpaired, all is safe. They are exposed to a single single danger, and that
is that by constantly changing our voting citizenship through the wholesale,
but valuable and necessary infusion of Southern and Eastern European races * *
*. The danger has begun. * * * We should check it.' III New York State
Constitutional Convention 3012 (Rev. Record 1916).

See also id., at 3015--3017, 3021--3055\. This evidence was reinforced by an
understanding of the cultural milieu at the time of proposal and enactment,
spanning a period from 1915 to 1921--not one of the enlightened eras of our
history. See generally Chafee, Free Speech in the United States 102, 237, 269
--282 (1954 ed.). Congress was aware of this evidence. See, e.g., Literacy
Tests and Voter Requirements in Federal and State Elections, Senate Hearings,
n. 5, supra, 507--513; Voting Rights, House Hearings, n. 3, supra, 508--513.

15

Other States have found ways of assuring an intelligent exercise of the
franchise short of total disenfranchisement of persons not literate in
English. For example, in Hawaii, where literacy in either English or Hawaiian
suffices, candidates' names may be printed in both languages, Hawaii Rev.Laws
§ 11--38 (1963 Supp.); New York itself already provides assistance for those
exempt from the literacy requirement and are literate in no language, N.Y.
Election Law, § 169; and, of course, the problem of assuring the intelligent
exercise of the franchise has been met by those States, more than 30 in
number, that have no literacy requirement at all, see e.g., Fla.Stat.Ann. §§
97.061, 101.061 (1960) (form of personal assistance); New Mexico Stat.Ann. §§
3--2 11, 3--3--13 (personal assistance for those literate in no language), §§
3--3--7, 3--3--12, 3--2--41 (1953) (ballots and instructions authorized to be
printed in English or Spanish). Section 4(e) does not preclude resort to these
alternative methods of assuring the intelligent exercise of the franchise.

True, the statute precludes, for a certain class, disenfranchisement and thus
limits the States' choice of means of satisfying a purported state interest.
But our cases have held that the States can be required to tailor carefully
the means of satisfying a legitimate state interest when fundamental liberties
and rights are threatened, see, e.g., Carrington v. Rash, 380 U.S. 89, 96, 85
S.Ct. 775, 780, 13 L.Ed.2d 675; Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections, 383
U.S. 663, 670, 86 S.Ct. 1079, 1083, 16 L.Ed.2d 169; Thomas v. Collins, 323
U.S. 516, 529--530, 65 S.Ct. 315, 322--323, 89 L.Ed. 430; Thornhill v. State
of Alabama, 310 U.S. 88, 95--96, 60 S.Ct. 736, 740--741, 84 L.Ed. 1093; United
States v. Carolene Products Co., 304 U.S. 144, 152--153, n. 4, 58 S.Ct. 778,
783--784, 82 L.Ed. 1234; Meyer v. State of Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390, 43 S.Ct.
625, 67 L.Ed. 1042; and Congress is free to apply the same principle in the
exercise of its powers.

16

See, e.g., 111 Cong.Rec. 11060--11061, 15666, 16235. The record in this case
includes affidavits describing the nature of New York's two major Spanish-
language newspapers, one daily and one weekly, and its three full-time
Spanish-language radio stations and affidavits from those who have campaigned
in Spanish-speaking areas.

17

See, e.g., 111 Cong.Rec. 11061 (Senator Long of Louisiana and Senator Young),
11064 (Senator Holland), drawing on their experience with voters literate in a
language other than English. See also an affidavit from Representative Willis
of Louisiana expressing the view that on the basis of his thirty years'
personal experience in politics he has 'formed a definite opinion that French-
speaking voters who are illiterate in English generally have as clear a grasp
of the issues and an understanding of the candidates, as do people who read
and write the English language.'

18

See, e.g., 111 Cong.Rec. 11060--11061.

19

See Magruder, The Commonwealth Status of Puerto Rico, 15 U.Pitt.L.Rev. 1
(1953).

20

See, e.g., 111 Cong.Rec. 11060--11061, 11066, 11073, 16235. See Osuna, A
History of Education in Puerto Rico (1949).

21

See, e.g., 111 Cong.Rec. 16235; Voting Rights, House Hearings, n. 3, supra,
362. See also Jones Act of 1917, 39 Stat. 953, conferring United States
citizenship on all citizens of Puerto Rico.

1

The pertinent portions of the New York Constitution, Art. II, § 1, and
statutory provisions are reproduced in the Court's opinion, ante, 384 U.S. pp.
644--645, 86 S.Ct. p. 1720, n. 2.

2

The Fifteenth Amendment forbids denial or abridgment of the franchise 'on
account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude'; the Seventeenth
deals with popular election of members of the Senate; the Nineteenth provides
for equal suffrage for women; the Twenty-fourth outlaws the poll tax as a
qualification for participation in federal elections.

3

The test is described in McGovney, The American Suffrage Medley 63 (1949) as
follows: 'The examination is based upon prose compositions of about ten lines
each, prepared by the personnel of the State Department of Education, designed
to be of the level of reading in the sixth grade * * *. These are uniform for
any single examination throughout the state. The examination is given by
school authorities and graded by school superintendents or teachers under
careful instructions from the central authority, to secure uniformity of
grading as nearly as is possible.' The 1943 test, submitted by the Attorney
General of New York as representative, is reproduced below:

NEW YORK STATE REGENTS LITERACY TEST

(To be filled in by the candidate in ink)

Write your name here...............................................

First name Middle initial Last name

Write your address here............................................

Write the date here................................................

Month Day Year

Read this and then write the answers to the questions

Read it as many times as you need to

The legislative branch of the National Government is called the Congress of
the United States. Congress makes the laws of the Nation. Congress is composed
of two houses. The upper house is called the Senate and its members are called
Senators. There are 96 Senators in the upper house, two from each State. Each
United States Senator is elected for a term of six years. The lower house of
Congress is known as the House of Representatives. The number of
Representatives from each state is determined by the population of that state.
At present there are 435 members of the House of Representatives. Each
Representative is elected for a term of two years. Congress meets in the
Capital at Washington.

The answers to the following questions are to be taken from the above
paragraph

1 How many houses are there in Congress?

2 What does Congress do?

3 What is the lower house of Congress called?

4 How many members are there in the lower house?

5 How long is the term of office of a United States Senator?

6 How many Senators are there from each state?

7 For how long a period are members of the House of Reprsentatives elected?

8 In what city does Congress meet?

4

There is no allegation of discriminatory enforcement, and the method of
examination, see n. 3, supra, makes unequal application virtually impossible.
McGovney has noted, op. cit. supra, at 62, that 'New York is the only state in
the Union that both has a reasonable reading requirement and administers it in
a manner that secures uniformity of application throughout the state and
precludes discrimination, so far as is humanly possible.' See Camacho v.
Rogers, D.C., 199 F.Supp. 155, 159--160.

5

See McKinney's Consolidated Laws of New York Ann., c. 16, Education Law, §
4605\. See generally Handbook of Adult Education in the United States 455--465
(Knowles ed. 1960).

6

The statute makes an exception to its sixth-grade rule so that where state law
'provides that a different level of education is presumptive of literacy,' the
applicant must show that he has completed 'an equivalent level of education'
in the foreign-language United States school.

7

Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment states that 'The Congress shall have
power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article.'

8

See generally Karst, Legislative Facts in Constitutional Litigation, 1960 The
Supreme Court Review 75 (Kurland ed.); Alfange, The Relevance of Legislative
Facts in Constitutional Law, 114 U.Pa.L.Rev. 637 (1966).

9

There were no committee hearings or reports referring to this section, which
was introduced from the floor during debate on the full Voting Rights Act. See
111 Cong.Rec. 11027, 15666, 16234.

10

See Thayer, The Origin and Scope of the American Doctrine of Constitutional
Law, 7 Harv.L.Rev. 129, 154--155 (1893).

11

A number of other arguments have been suggested to sustain the
constitutionality of § 4(e). These are referred to in the Court's opinion, 384
U.S. pp. 646--647, 86 S.Ct. p. 1721, n. 5. Since all of such arguments are
rendered superfluous by the Court's decision and none of them is considered by
the majority, I deem it unnecessary to deal with them save to say that in my
opinion none of those contentions provides an adequate constitutional basis
for sustaining the statute.

