# Cooper v. Aaron

358 U.S. 1 (1958)

**Opinion of the Court by The CHIEF JUSTICE, Mr. Justice BLACK, Mr. Justice FRANKFURTER, Mr. Justice DOUGLAS, Mr. Justice BURTON, Mr. Justice CLARK, Mr. Justice HARLAN, Mr. Justice BRENNAN, and Mr. Justice WHITTAKER.**

As this case reaches us it raises questions of the highest importance to the
maintenance of our federal system of government. It necessarily involves a
claim by the Governor and Legislature of a State that there is no duty on
state officials to obey federal court orders resting on this Court's
considered interpretation of the United States Constitution. Specifically it
involves actions by the Governor and Legislature of Arkansas upon the premise
that they are not bound by our holding in Brown v. Board of Education. We are urged to uphold a suspension of the Little Rock School Board's plan to do away with segregated
public schools in Little Rock until state laws and efforts to upset and
nullify our holding in Brown v. Board of Education have been further
challenged and tested in the courts. We reject these contentions.

The following are the facts and circumstances so far as necessary to show how
the legal questions are presented.

On May 17, 1954, this Court decided that enforced racial segregation in the
public schools of a State is a denial of the equal protection of the laws
enjoined by the Fourteenth Amendment. Brown v. Board of Education. The Court postponed, pending further argument, formulation of a decree to effectuate this decision. That decree was rendered May 31, 1955. Brown v. Board of Education [II]. In the
formulation of that decree the Court recognized that good faith compliance
with the principles declared in Brown might in some situations 'call for
elimination of a variety of obstacles in making the transition to school
systems operated in accordance with the constitutional principles set forth in
our May 17, 1954, decision.'  The Court went on to state:

> Courts of equity may properly take into account the public interest in the elimination of such obstacles in a systematic and effective manner. But it should go without saying that the vitality of these constitutional principles cannot be allowed to yield simply because of disagreement with them.

> While giving weight to these public and private considerations, the courts will require that the defendants make a prompt and reasonable start toward full compliance with our May 17, 1954, ruling. Once such a start has been made, the courts may find that additional time is necessary to carry out the ruling in an effective manner. The burden rests upon the defendants to establish that such time is necessary in the public interest and is consistent with good faith compliance at the earliest practicable date. To that end, the courts may consider problems related to administration, arising from the physical condition of the school plant, the school transportation system, personnel, revision of school districts and attendance areas into compact units to achieve a system of determining admission to the public schools on a nonracial basis, and revision of local laws and regulations which may be necessary in solving the foregoing problems.

Under such circumstances, the District Courts were directed to require 'a
prompt and reasonable start toward full compliance,' and to take such action
as was necessary to bring about the end of racial segregation in the public
schools 'with all deliberate speed.'  Of course, in many locations,
obedience to the duty of desegregation would require the immediate general
admission of Negro children, otherwise qualified as students for their
appropriate classes, at particular schools. On the other hand, a District
Court, after analysis of the relevant factors (which, of course, excludes
hostility to racial desegregation), might conclude that justification existed
for not requiring the present nonsegregated admission of all qualified Negro
children. In such circumstances, however, the Court should scrutinize the
program of the school authorities to make sure that they had developed
arrangements pointed toward the earliest practicable completion of
desegregation, and had taken appropriate steps to put their program into
effective operation. It was made plain that delay in any guise in order to
deny the constitutional rights of Negro children could not be countenanced,
and that only a prompt start, diligently and earnestly pursued, to eliminate
racial segregation from the public schools could constitute good faith
compliance. State authorities were thus duty bound to devote every effort
toward initiating desegregation and bringing about the elimination of racial
discrimination in the public school system.

On May 20, 1954, three days after the first Brown opinion, the Little Rock
District School Board adopted, and on May 23, 1954, made public, a statement
of policy entitled 'Supreme Court Decision--Segregation in Public Schools.' In
this statement the Board recognized that 'It is our responsibility to comply with Federal Constitutional Requirements and we intend to do so when the Supreme Court of the United States outlines the method to be followed.' Thereafter the Board undertook studies of the
administrative problems confronting the transition to a desegregated public
school system at Little Rock. It instructed the Superintendent of Schools to
prepare a plan for desegregation, and approved such a plan on May 24, 1955,
seven days before the second Brown opinion. The plan provided for
desegregation at the senior high school level (grades 10 through 12) as the
first stage. Desegregation at the junior high and elementary levels was to
follow. It was contemplated that desegregation at the high school level would
commence in the fall of 1957, and the expectation was that complete
desegregation of the school system would be accomplished by 1963. Following
the adoption of this plan, the Superintendent of Schools discussed it with a
large number of citizen groups in the city. As a result of these discussions,
the Board reached the conclusion that 'a large majority of the residents' of
Little Rock were of 'the belief * * * that the Plan, although objectionable in
principle,' from the point of view of those supporting segregated schools,
'was still the best for the interests of all pupils in the District.'

While the School Board was thus going forward with its preparation for
desegregating the Little Rock school system, other state authorities, in
contrast, were actively pursuing a program designed to perpetuate in Arkansas
the system of racial segregation which this Court had held violated the
Fourteenth Amendment. First came, in November 1956, an amendment to the State
Constitution flatly commanding the Arkansas General Assembly to oppose 'in
every Constitutional manner the Un-constitutional desegregation decisions of
May 17, 1954 and May 31, 1955 of the United States Supreme Court.'  Pursuant to this state constitutional command, a law relieving school children from compulsory attendance at
racially mixed schools and a law establishing a State
Sovereignty Commission were enacted by the
General Assembly in February 1957.

The School Board and the Superintendent of Schools nevertheless continued with
preparations to carry out the first stage of the desegregation program. Nine
Negro children were scheduled for admission in September 1957 to Central High
School, which has more than two thousand students. Various administrative
measures, designed to assure the smooth transition of this first stage of
desegregation, were undertaken.

On September 2, 1957, the day before these Negro students were to enter
Central High, the school authorities were met with drastic opposing action on
the part of the Governor of Arkansas who dispatched units of the Arkansas
National Guard to the Central High School grounds and placed the school 'off
limits' to colored students. As found by the District Court in subsequent
proceedings, the Governor's action had not been requested by the school
authorities, and was entirely unheralded. 

The Board's petition for postponement in this proceeding states: 'The effect
of that action [of the Governor] was to harden the core of opposition to the
Plan and cause many persons who theretofore had reluctantly accepted the Plan
to believe there was some power in the State of Arkansas which, when exerted,
could nullify the Federal law and permit disobedience of the decree of this
[District] Court, and from that date hostility to the Plan was increased and
criticism of the officials of the [School] District has become more bitter and
unrestrained.' The Governor's action caused the School Board to request the
Negro students on September 2 not to attend the high school 'until the legal
dilemma was solved.' The next day, September 3, 1957, the Board petitioned the
District Court for instructions, and the court, after a hearing, found that
the Board's request of the Negro students to stay away from the high school
had been made because of the stationing of the military guards by the state
authorities. The court determined that this was not a reason for departing
from the approved plan, and ordered the School Board and Superintendent to
proceed with it.

On the morning of the next day, September 4, 1957, the Negro children
attempted to enter the high school but, as the District Court later found,
units of the Arkansas National Guard 'acting pursuant to the Governor's order,
stood shoulder to shoulder at the school grounds and thereby forcibly
prevented the 9 Negro students * * * from entering,' as they continued to do
every school day during the following three weeks. 

That same day, September 4, 1957, the United States Attorney for the Eastern
District of Arkansas was requested by the District Court to begin an immediate
investigation in order to fix responsibility for the interference with the
orderly implementation of the District Court's direction to carry out the
desegregation program. Three days later, September 7, the District Court
denied a petition of the School Board and the Superintendent of Schools for an
order temporarily suspending continuance of the program.

Upon completion of the United States Attorney's investigation, he and the
Attorney General of the United States, at the District Court's request,
entered the proceedings and filed a petition on behalf of the United States,
as amicus curiae , to enjoin the Governor of Arkansas and officers of the
Arkansas National Guard from further attempts to prevent obedience to the
court's order. After hearings on the petition, the District Court found that
the School Board's plan had been obstructed by the Governor through the use of
National Guard troops, and granted a preliminary injunction on September 20,
1957, enjoining the Governor and the officers of the Guard from preventing the
attendance of Negro children at Central High School, and from otherwise
obstructing or interfering with the orders of the court in connection with the
plan.  The National Guard was then withdrawn from the school.

The next school day was Monday, September 23, 1957. The Negro children entered
the high school that morning under the protection of the Little Rock Police
Department and members of the Arkansas State Police. But the officers caused
the children to be removed from the school during the morning because they had
difficulty controlling a large and demonstrating crowd which had gathered at
the high school. On September 25, however, the President of the United States dispatched federal troops to Central High School and admission of the Negro students to the school was thereby effected. Regular army troops continued at the high school until November 27, 1957. They were then replaced by federalized National Guardsmen who remained throughout
the balance of the school year. Eight of the Negro students remained in
attendance at the school throughout the school year.

We come now to the aspect of the proceedings presently before us. On February
20, 1958, the School Board and the Superintendent of Schools filed a petition
in the District Court seeking a postponement of their program for
desegregation. Their position in essence was that because of extreme public
hostility, which they stated had been engendered largely by the official
attitudes and actions of the Governor and the Legislature, the maintenance of
a sound educational program at Central High School, with the Negro students in
attendance, would be impossible. The Board therefore proposed that the Negro
students already admitted to the school be withdrawn and sent to segregated
schools, and that all further steps to carry out the Board's desegregation
program be postponed for a period later suggested by the Board to be two and
one-half years.

After a hearing the District Court granted the relief requested by the Board.
Among other things the court found that the past year at Central High School
had been attended by conditions of 'chaos, bedlam and turmoil'; that there
were 'repeated incidents of more or less serious violence directed against the
Negro students and their property'; that there was 'tension and unrest among
the school administrators, the class-room teachers, the pupils, and the
latters' parents, which inevitably had an adverse effect upon the educational
program'; that a school official was threatened with violence; that a 'serious
financial burden' had been cast on the School District; that the education of
the students had suffered 'and under existing conditions will continue to
suffer'; that the Board would continue to need 'military assistance or its
equivalent'; that the local police department would not be able 'to detail
enough men to afford the necessary protection'; and that the situation was
'intolerable.' 

In affirming the judgment of the Court of Appeals which reversed the District
Court we have accepted without reservation the position of the School Board,
the Superintendent of Schools, and their counsel that they displayed entire
good faith in the conduct of these proceedings and in dealing with the
unfortunate and distressing sequence of events which has been outlined. We
likewise have accepted the findings of the District Court as to the conditions
at Central High School during the 1957-1958 school year, and also the findings
that the educational progress of all the students, white and colored, of that
school has suffered and will continue to suffer if the conditions which
prevailed last year are permitted to continue.

The significance of these findings, however, is to be considered in light of
the fact, indisputably revealed by the record before us, that the conditions
they depict are directly traceable to the actions of legislators and executive
officials of the State of Arkansas, taken in their official capacities, which
reflect their own determination to resist this Court's decision in the Brown
case and which have brought about violent resistance to that decision in
Arkansas. In its petition for certiorari filed in this Court, the School Board
itself describes the situation in this language: 'The legislative, executive,
and judicial departments of the state government opposed the desegregation of
Little Rock schools by enacting laws, calling out troops, making statements
villifying federal law and federal courts, and failing to utilize state law
enforcement agencies and judicial processes to maintain public peace.'

One may well sympathize with the position of the Board in the face of the
frustrating conditions which have confronted it, but, regardless of the
Board's good faith, the actions of the other state agencies responsible for
those conditions compel us to reject the Board's legal position. Had Central
High School been under the direct management of the State itself, it could
hardly be suggested that those immediately in charge of the school should be
heard to assert their own good faith as a legal excuse for delay in
implementing the constitutional rights of these respondents, when vindication
of those rights was rendered difficult of impossible by the actions of other
state officials. The situation here is in no different posture because the
members of the School Board and the Superintendent of Schools are local
officials; from the point of view of the Fourteenth Amendment, they stand in
this litigation as the agents of the State.

The constitutional rights of respondents are not to be sacrificed or yielded
to the violence and disorder which have followed upon the actions of the
Governor and Legislature. As this Court said some 41 years ago in a unanimous
opinion in a case involving another aspect of racial segregation: 'It is urged
that this proposed segregation will promote the public peace by preventing
race conflicts. Desirable as this is, and important as is the preservation of
the public peace, this aim cannot be accomplished by laws or ordinances which
deny rights created or protected by the federal Constitution.' Thus law and order are
not here to be preserved by depriving the Negro children of their
constitutional rights. The record before us clearly establishes that the
growth of the Board's difficulties to a magnitude beyond its unaided power to
control is the product of state action. Those difficulties, as counsel for the
Board forthrightly conceded on the oral argument in this Court, can also be
brought under control by state action.

What has been said, in the light of the facts developed, is enough to dispose
of the case. However, we should answer the premise of the actions of the
Governor and Legislature that they are not bound by our holding in the Brown
case. It is necessary only to recall some basic constitutional propositions
which are settled doctrine.

Article VI of the Constitution makes the Constitution the 'supreme Law of the
Land.' In 1803, Chief Justice Marshall, speaking for a unanimous Court,
referring to the Constitution as 'the fundamental and paramount law of the
nation,' declared in the notable case of Marbury v. Madison that 'It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the law is.' This decision declared the basic principle that the federal judiciary is supreme in the exposition of the law of the Constitution, and that principle has ever since been respected by this
Court and the Country as a permanent and indispensable feature of our
constitutional system. It follows that the interpretation of the Fourteenth
Amendment enunciated by this Court in the Brown case is the supreme law of the
land, and Art. VI of the Constitution makes it of binding effect on the States
'any Thing in the Constitution or Laws of any State to the Contrary
notwithstanding.' Every state legislator and executive and judicial officer is
solemnly committed by oath taken pursuant to Art. VI, ¶3 'to support this
Constitution.' Chief Justice Taney, speaking for a unanimous Court in 1859,
said that this requirement reflected the framers' 'anxiety to preserve it [the
Constitution] in full force, in all its powers, and to guard against
resistance to or evasion of its authority, on the part of a State.' Ableman v. Booth.

No state legislator or executive or judicial officer can war against the
Constitution without violating his undertaking to support it. Chief Justice
Marshall spoke for a unanimous Court in saying that: 'If the legislatures of
the several states may, at will, annul the judgments of the courts of the
United States, and destroy the rights acquired under those judgments, the
constitution itself becomes a solemn mockery * * *.'  A Governor who asserts a power to nullify a federal court order is similarly restrained. If he had such power, said Chief
Justice Hughes, in 1932, also for a unanimous Court, 'it is manifest that the
fiat of a state Governor, and not the Constitution of the United States, would
be the supreme law of the land; that the restrictions of the Federal
Constitution upon the exercise of state power would be but impotent phrases.'

It is, of course, quite true that the responsibility for public education is
primarily the concern of the States, but it is equally true that such
responsibilities, like all other state activity, must be exercised
consistently with federal constitutional requirements as they apply to state
action. The Constitution created a government dedicated to equal justice under
law. The Fourteenth Amendment embodied and emphasized that ideal. State
support of segregated schools through any arrangement, management, funds, or
property cannot be squared with the Amendment's command that no State shall
deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
The right of a student not to be segregated on racial grounds in schools so
maintained is indeed so fundamental and pervasive that it is embraced in the
concept of due process of law. Bolling v. Sharpe. The basic decision in Brown was unanimously reached by this Court only after the case had been briefed and twice argued and the issues had been given the most serious consideration. Since the first Brown opinion three new Justices have come to the Court. They are at one with the Justices still
on the Court who participated in that basic decision as to its correctness,
and that decision is now unanimously reaffirmed. The principles announced in
that decision and the obedience of the States to them, according to the
command of the Constitution, are indispensable for the protection of the
freedoms guaranteed by our fundamental charter for all of us. Our
constitutional ideal of equal justice under law is thus made a living truth.

\newpage

