461 U.S. 190

103 S.Ct. 1713

75 L.Ed.2d 752

PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY, et al., Petitioners  
v.  
STATE ENERGY RESOURCES CONSERVATION & DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION et al.

No. 81-1945.

Argued Jan. 17, 1983.

Decided April 20, 1983.

_Syllabus_

Section 25524.1(b) of the California Public Resources Code provides that
before a nuclear powerplant may be built, the State Energy Resources
Conservation and Development Commission must determine on a case-by-case basis
that there will be "adequate capacity" for interim storage of the plant's
spent fuel at the time the plant requires such storage. Section 25524.2
imposes a moratorium on the certification of new nuclear plants until the
State Commission finds that there has been developed and that the United
States through its authorized agency has approved a demonstrated technology or
means for the permanent and terminal disposal of high-level nuclear wastes.
Petitioner electric utilities filed an action in Federal District Court
seeking a declaration that these provisions, _inter alia,_ are invalid under
the Supremacy Clause because they were pre-empted by the Atomic Energy Act of
1954. The District Court, after finding that the issues presented by the two
provisions were ripe for adjudication, held that they were pre-empted by and
in conflict with the Atomic Energy Act. The Court of Appeals agreed that the
challenge to § 25524.2 was ripe for review, but found that the challenge to §
25524.1(b) was not because it could not be known whether the State Commission
will ever find a nuclear plant's storage capacity to be inadequate. The court
went on to hold that § 25524.2 was not designed to provide protection against
radiation hazards but was adopted because uncertainties in the nuclear fuel
cycle make nuclear power an uneconomical and uncertain source of energy, and
therefore that the section was not pre-empted because §§ 271 and 274(k) of the
Atomic Energy Act constituted authorization for States to regulate nuclear
powerplants for purposes other than protection against radiation hazards. The
court further held that § 25524.2 was not invalid as a barrier to fulfillment
of the federal goal of encouraging the development of atomic energy.

_Held:_

1\. The challenge to § 25524.2 is ripe for judicial review, but the questions
concerning § 25524.1(b) are not. Pp. 200-203.

(a) The question of ripeness turns "on the fitness of the issues for judicial
decision" and "the hardship to the parties of withholding court
consideration." _Abbott Laboratories v. Gardner,_ 387 U.S. 136, 149, 87 S.Ct.
1507, 1515, 18 L.Ed.2d 681. Both of these factors counsel in favor of finding
the challenge to § 25524.2 ripe for adjudication. The question of pre-emption
is predominately legal and to require the industry to proceed without knowing
whether the moratorium imposed by § 25524.2 is valid would impose a palpable
and considerable hardship on the utilities, and may ultimately work harm on
the citizens of California. Moreover, if § 25524.2 is void as hindering
commercial development of atomic energy, delayed resolution would frustrate
one of the key purposes of the Atomic Energy Act. Pp. 200-202.

(b) Under circumstances where it is uncertain whether the State Commission
will ever find a nuclear plant's interim storage capacity to be inadequate,
and where, because of this Court's holding, _infra,_ that § 25524.2 is not
pre-empted by federal law, it is unlikely that industry behavior would be
uniquely affected by such uncertainty surrounding the interim storage
provision, a court should not stretch to reach an early, and perhaps a
premature, decision respecting § 25524.1(b). P.203.

2\. Section 25524.2 is not pre-empted by the Atomic Energy Act. Pp.203-223.

(a) From the passage of the Atomic Energy Act in 1954, through several
revisions, and to the present day, Congress has preserved the dual regulation
of nuclear-powered electricity generation: the Federal Government maintains
complete control of the safety and "nuclear" aspects of energy generation,
whereas the States exercise their traditional authority over economic
questions such as the need for additional generating capacity, the type of
generating facilities to be licensed, land use, and ratemaking. This Court
accepts California's avowed economic rather than safety purpose as the
rationale for enacting § 25524.2, and accordingly the statute lies outside the
federally occupied field of nuclear safety regulation. Pp. 205-216.

(b) Section 25524.2 does not conflict with federal regulation of nuclear waste
disposal, with the decision of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) that it
is permissible to continue to license reactors, notwithstanding uncertainty
surrounding the waste disposal problem, or with Congress' recent passage of
the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 directed at that problem. Because the
NRC's decision does not and could not compel a utility to develop a nuclear
plant, compliance with both that decision and § 25524.2 is possible. Moreover,
because the NRC's regulations are aimed at insuring that plants are safe, not
necessarily that they are economical, § 25524.2 does not interfere with the
objective of those regulations. And as there is no attempt on California's
part to enter the field of developing and licensing nuclear waste disposal
technology, a field occupied by the Federal Government, § 25524.2 is not pre-
empted any more by the NRC's obligations in the waste disposal field than by
its licensing power over the plants themselves. Nor does it appear that
Congress intended through the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 to make the
decision for the States as to whether there is now sufficient federal
commitment to fuel storage and waste disposal that licensing of nuclear
reactors may resume. Moreover, that Act can be interpreted as being directed
at solving the nuclear waste disposal problem for existing reactors without
necessarily encouraging or requiring that future plant construction be
undertaken. Pp. 217-220.

(c) Section 25524.2 does not frustrate the Atomic Energy Act's purpose to
develop the commercial use of nuclear power. Promotion of nuclear power is not
to be accomplished "at all costs." Moreover, Congress has given the States
authority to determine, as a matter of economics, whether a nuclear plant vis-
a-vis a fossil fuel plant should be built. California's decision to exercise
that authority does not, in itself, constitute a basis for pre-emption. Pp.
220-223.

659 F.2d 903, affirmed.

John R. McDonough, Long Beach, Cal., for petitioners.

Louis F. Claiborne, Washington, D.C., for the United States as _amicus
curiae,_ supporting petitioners, by special leave of Court.

Laurence H. Tribe, Cambridge, Mass., for the respondents.

Justice WHITE delivered the opinion of the Court.

1

The turning of swords into plowshares has symbolized the transformation of
atomic power into a source of energy in American society. To facilitate this
development the federal government relaxed its monopoly over fissionable
materials and nuclear technology, and in its place, erected a complex scheme
to promote the civilian development of nuclear energy, while seeking to
safeguard the public and the environment from the unpredictable risks of a new
technology. Early on, it was decided that the states would continue their
traditional role in the regulation of electricity production. The
interrelationship of federal and state authority in the nuclear energy field
has not been simple; the federal regulatory structure has been frequently
amended to optimize the partnership.

2

This case emerges from the intersection of the federal government's efforts to
ensure that nuclear power is safe with the exercise of the historic state
authority over the generation and sale of electricity. At issue is whether
provisions in the 1976 amendments to California's Warren-Alquist Act,
Cal.Pub.Res.Code §§ 25524.1(b) and 25524.2 (West 1977), which condition the
construction of nuclear plants on findings by the State Energy Resources
Conservation and Development Commission that adequate storage facilities and
means of disposal are available for nuclear waste, are preempted by the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2011, _et seq._

3

* A nuclear reactor must be periodically refueled and the "spent fuel" removed. This spent fuel is intensely radioactive and must be carefully stored. The general practice is to store the fuel in a water-filled pool at the reactor site. For many years, it was assumed that this fuel would be reprocessed; accordingly, the storage pools were designed as short-term holding facilities with limited storage capacities. As expectations for reprocessing remained unfulfilled, the spent fuel accumulated in the storage pools, creating the risk that nuclear reactors would have to be shutdown. This could occur if there were insufficient room in the pool to store spent fuel and also if there were not enough space to hold the entire fuel core when certain inspections or emergencies required unloading of the reactor. In recent years, the problem has taken on special urgency. Some 8,000 metric tons of spent nuclear fuel have already accumulated, and it is projected that by the year 2000 there will be some 72,000 metric tons of spent fuel.1 Government studies indicate that a number of reactors could be forced to shut down in the near future due to the inability to store spent fuel.2

4

There is a second dimension to the problem. Even with water-pools adequate to
store safely all the spent fuel produced during the working lifetime of the
reactor, permanent disposal is needed because the wastes will remain
radioactive for thousands of years.3 A number of long-term nuclear waste
management strategies have been extensively examined. These range from sinking
the wastes in stable deep seabeds, to placing the wastes beneath ice sheets in
Greenland and Antarctica, to ejecting the wastes into space by rocket. The
greatest attention has been focused on disposing of the wastes in subsurface
geologic repositories such as salt deposits.4 Problems of how and where to
store nuclear wastes has engendered considerable scientific, political, and
public debate. There are both safety and economic aspects to the nuclear waste
issue: first, if not properly stored, nuclear wastes might leak and endanger
both the environment and human health;5 second, the lack of a long-term
disposal option increases the risk that the insufficiency of interim storage
space for spent fuel will lead to reactor-shutdowns, rendering nuclear energy
an unpredictable and uneconomical adventure.6

5

The California laws at issue here are responses to these concerns. In 1974,
California adopted the Warren-Alquist State Energy Resources Conservation and
Development Act, Cal.Pub.Res.Code §§ 25000-25986 (West 1977 and Supp.1981).
The Act requires that a utility seeking to build in California any electric
power generating plant, including a nuclear power plant, must apply for
certification to the State Energy Resources and Conservation Commission
(Energy Commission).7 The Warren-Alquist Act was amended in 1976 to provide
additional state regulation of new nuclear power plant construction.

6

Two sections of these amendments are before us. Section 25524.1(b) provides
that before additional nuclear plants may be built, the Energy Commission must
determine on a case-by-case basis that there will be "adequate capacity" for
storage of a plant's spent fuel rods "at the time such nuclear facility
requires such . . . storage." The law also requires that each utility provide
continuous, on-site, "full core reserve storage capacity" in order to permit
storage of the entire reactor core if it must be removed to permit repairs of
the reactor. In short, § 25524.1(b) addresses the interim storage of spent
fuel.

7

Section 25524.2 deals with the long-term solution to nuclear wastes. This
section imposes a moratorium on the certification of new nuclear plants until
the Energy Commission "finds that there has been developed and that the United
States through its authorized agency has approved and there exists a
demonstrated technology or means for the disposal of high-level nuclear
waste." "Disposal" is defined as a "method for the permanent and terminal
disposition of high-level nuclear waste . . ." Cal.Pub.Res.Code § 25524.2(a),
(c). Such a finding must be reported to the state legislature, which may
nullify it.8

8

In 1978, petitioners Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Southern California
Edison Company filed this action in the United States District Court,
requesting a declaration that numerous provisions of the Warren-Alquist Act,
including the two sections challenged here, are invalid under the Supremacy
Clause because they are preempted by the Atomic Energy Act. The District Court
held that petitioners had standing to challenge §§ 25524.1(b) and 25524.2,9
that the issues presented by these two statutes are ripe for adjudication, and
that the two provisions are void because they are preempted by and in conflict
with the Atomic Energy Act. 489 F.Supp. 699 (E.D.Cal.1980).

9

The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the District Court's
ruling that the petitioners have standing to challenge the California
statutes, and also agreed that the challenge to § 25524.2 is ripe for review.
It concluded, however, that the challenge to § 25524.1(b) was not ripe
"because we cannot know whether the Energy Commission will ever find a nuclear
plant's storage capacity to be inadequate . . ." 659 F.2d, at 918.10 On the
merits, the court held that the nuclear moratorium provisions of § 25524.2
were not preempted because §§ 271 and 274(k) of the Atomic Energy Act, 42
U.S.C. §§ 2018 and 2021(k), constitute a Congressional authorization for
states to regulate nuclear power plants "for purposes other than protection
against radiation hazards."11 The court held that § 25524.2 was not designed
to provide protection against radiation hazards, but was adopted because
"uncertainties in the nuclear fuel cycle make nuclear power an uneconomical
and uncertain source of energy." 659 F.2d, at 925. Nor was the provision
invalid as a barrier to fulfillment of the federal goal of encouraging the
development of atomic energy. The granting of state authority in §§ 271 and
274(k), combined with recent federal enactments, demonstrated that Congress
did not intend that nuclear power be developed "at all costs," but only that
it proceed consistent with other priorities and subject to controls
traditionally exercised by the states and expressly preserved by the federal
statute.12

10

We granted certiorari limited to the questions of whether §§ 25524.1(b) and
25524.2 are ripe for judicial review, and whether they are preempted by the
Atomic Energy Act. --- U.S. ----, 102 S.Ct. 2956, 73 L.Ed.2d 1348 (1982).

II

11

We agree that the challenge to § 25524.2 _is_ ripe for judicial review, but
that the questions concerning § 25524.1(b) are not. The basic rationale of the
ripeness doctrine "is to prevent the courts, through avoidance of premature
adjudication, from entangling themselves in abstract disagreements over
administrative policies, and also to protect the agencies from judicial
interference until an administrative decision has been formalized and its
effects felt in a concrete way by the challenging parties." _Abbott
Laboratories v. Gardner,_ 387 U.S. 136, 148-149, 87 S.Ct. 1507, 1515-1516, 18
L.Ed.2d 681 (1967). In _Abbott Laboratories,_ which remains our leading
discussion of the doctrine, we indicated that the question of ripeness turns
on "the fitness of the issues for judicial decision" and "the hardship to the
parties of withholding court consideration." _Id.,_ at 149, 87 S.Ct., at 1515.

12

Both of these factors counsel in favor of finding the challenge to the waste
disposal regulations in § 25524.2 ripe for adjudication. The question of
preemption is predominantly legal, and although it would be useful to have the
benefit of California's interpretation of what constitutes a demonstrated
technology or means for the disposal of high-level nuclear waste, resolution
of the preemption issue need not await that development. Moreover,
postponement of decision would likely work substantial hardship on the
utilities. As the Court of Appeals cogently reasoned, for the utilities to
proceed in hopes that, when the time for certification came, either the
required findings would be made or the law would be struck down, requires the
expenditures of millions of dollars over a number of years, without any
certainty of recovery if certification were denied.13 The construction of new
nuclear facilities requires considerable advance planning--on the order of 12
to 14 years.14 Thus, as in the _Rail Reorganization Act Cases,_ 419 U.S. 102,
144, 95 S.Ct. 335, 359, 42 L.Ed.2d 320 (1975), "decisions to be made now or in
the short future may be affected" by whether we act. "One does not have to
await the consummation of threatened injury to obtain preventive relief. If
the injury is certainly impending, that is enough." _Id.,_ at 143, 95 S.Ct.,
at 358, _quoting Pennsylvania v. West Virginia,_ 262 U.S. 553, 593, 43 S.Ct.
658, 663, 67 L.Ed. 1117 (1923). To require the industry to proceed without
knowing whether the moratorium is valid would impose a palpable and
considerable hardship on the utilities, and may ultimately work harm on the
citizens of California. Moreover, if petitioners are correct that § 25524.2 is
void because it hinders the commercial development of atomic energy, "delayed
resolution would frustrate one of the key purposes of the [Atomic Energy]
Act." _Duke Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental Study Group, Inc.,_ 438 U.S.
59, 82, 98 S.Ct. 2620, 2635, 57 L.Ed.2d 595 (1978). For these reasons, the
issue of whether § 25524.2 is preempted by federal law should be decided
now.15

13

Questions concerning the constitutionality of the interim storage provision, §
25524.1(b), however, are not ripe for review. While the waste disposal statute
operates on a statewide basis, the Energy Commission is directed to make
determinations under § 25524.1(b) on a case-by-case basis. As the Court of
Appeals explained, because "we cannot know whether the Energy Commission will
ever find a nuclear plant's storage capacity to be inadequate," judicial
consideration of this provision should await further developments.16
Furthermore, because we hold today that § 25524.2 is not preempted by federal
law, there is little likelihood that industry behavior would be uniquely
affected by whatever uncertainty surrounds the interim storage provisions. In
these circumstances, a court should not stretch to reach an early, and perhaps
premature, decision respecting § 25524.1(b).

III

14

It is well-established that within Constitutional limits Congress may preempt
state authority by so stating in express terms. _Jones v. Rath Packing Co.,_
430 U.S. 519, 525, 97 S.Ct. 1305, 1309, 51 L.Ed.2d 604 (1977). Absent explicit
preemptive language, Congress' intent to supercede state law altogether may be
found from a "scheme of federal regulation so pervasive as to make reasonable
the inference that Congress left no room to supplement it," "because the Act
of Congress may touch a field in which the federal interest is so dominant
that the federal system will be assumed to preclude enforcement of state laws
on the same subject," or because "the object sought to be obtained by the
federal law and the character of obligations imposed by it may reveal the same
purpose." _Fidelity Federal Savings & Loan Ass'n v. de la Cuesta,_ \---- U.S.
----, ----, 102 S.Ct. 3014, 3022, 73 L.Ed.2d 664 (1982); _Rice v. Santa Fe
Elevator Corp.,_ 331 U.S. 218, 230, 67 S.Ct. 1146, 1152, 91 L.Ed. 1447 (1947).
Even where Congress has not entirely displaced state regulation in a specific
area, state law is preempted to the extent that it actually conflicts with
federal law. Such a conflict arises when "compliance with both federal and
state regulations is a physical impossibility," _Florida Lime & Avocado
Growers, Inc. v. Paul,_ 373 U.S. 132, 142-143, 83 S.Ct. 1210, 1217-1218, 10
L.Ed.2d 248 (1963), or where state law "stands as an obstacle to the
accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress."
_Hines v. Davidowitz,_ 312 U.S. 52, 67, 61 S.Ct. 399, 404, 85 L.Ed. 581
(1941).

15

Petitioners, the United States, and supporting _amici,_ present three major
lines of argument as to why § 25524.2 is preempted. First, they submit that
the statute--because it regulates construction of nuclear plants and because
it is allegedly predicated on safety concerns--ignores the division between
federal and state authority created by the Atomic Energy Act, and falls within
the field that the federal government has preserved for its own exclusive
control. Second, the statute, and the judgments that underlie it, conflict
with decisions concerning the nuclear waste disposal issue made by Congress
and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Third, the California statute
frustrates the federal goal of developing nuclear technology as a source of
energy. We consider each of these contentions in turn.

16

* Even a brief perusal of the Atomic Energy Act reveals that, despite its comprehensiveness, it does not at any point expressly require the States to construct or authorize nuclear power plants or prohibit the States from deciding, as an absolute or conditional matter, not to permit the construction of any further reactors. Instead, petitioners argue that the Act is intended to preserve the federal government as the sole regulator of all matters nuclear, and that § 25524.2 falls within the scope of this impliedly preempted field. But as we view the issue, Congress, in passing the 1954 Act and in subsequently amending it, intended that the federal government should regulate the radiological safety aspects involved in the construction and operation of a nuclear plant, but that the States retain their traditional responsibility in the field of regulating electrical utilities for determining questions of need, reliability, cost and other related state concerns.

17

Need for new power facilities, their economic feasibility, and rates and
services, are areas that have been characteristically governed by the States.
Justice Brandeis once observed that the "franchise to operate a public utility
. . . is a special privilege which . . . may be granted or withheld at the
pleasure of the State." _Frost v. Corporation Commission,_ 278 U.S. 515, 534,
49 S.Ct. 235, 242, 73 L.Ed. 483 (1929) (Brandeis, J. dissenting). "The nature
of government regulation of private utilities is such that a utility may
frequently be required by the state regulatory scheme to obtain approval for
practices a business regulated in less detail would be free to institute
without any approval from a regulatory body." _Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison
Co.,_ 419 U.S. 345, 357, 95 S.Ct. 449, 456, 42 L.Ed.2d 477 (1974). See
_Central Hudson Gas & Electric Corp. v. Public Service Commission of New
York,_ 447 U.S. 557, 569, 100 S.Ct. 2343, 2353, 65 L.Ed.2d 341 (1980) ("The
state concern that rates be fair and efficient represents a clear and
substantial governmental interest.") With the exception of the broad authority
of the Federal Power Commission, now the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission,
over the need for and pricing of electrical power transmitted in interstate
commerce, see Federal Power Act, 16 U.S.C. § 824 (1976), these economic
aspects of electrical generation have been regulated for many years and in
great detail by the states.17 As we noted in _Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power
Corp. v. NRDC,_ 435 U.S. 519, 550, 98 S.Ct. 1197, 1215, 55 L.Ed.2d 460 (1977),
"There is little doubt that under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, state public
utility commissions or similar bodies are empowered to make the initial
decision regarding the need for power." Thus, "Congress legislated here in a
field which the States have traditionally occupied . . . so we start with the
assumption that the historic police powers of the States were not to be
superseded by the Federal Act unless that was the clear and manifest purpose
of Congress." _Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., supra,_ 331 U.S., at 230, 67
S.Ct., at 1152.

18

The Atomic Energy Act must be read, however, against another background.
Enrico Fermi demonstrated the first nuclear reactor in 1942, and Congress
authorized civilian application of atomic power in 1946, Atomic Energy Act of
1946, see Act of Aug. 1, 1946, ch. 724, 60 Stat. 755, at which time the Atomic
Energy Commission (AEC) was created. Until 1954, however, the use, control and
ownership of nuclear technology remained a federal monopoly. The Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, Act of Aug. 30, 1954, ch. 1073, 68 Stat. 919, as amended, 42
U.S.C. §§ 2011-2281 (1976), grew out of Congress' determination that the
national interest would be best served if the Government encouraged the
private sector to become involved in the development of atomic energy for
peaceful purposes under a program of federal regulation and licensing. See
H.R.Rep. No. 2181, 83d Cong., 2d Sess., 1-11 (1954). The Act implemented this
policy decision by providing for licensing of private construction, ownership,
and operation of commercial nuclear power reactors. _Duke Power Co. v.
Carolina Environmental Study Group, Inc.,_ 438 U.S., at 63, 98 S.Ct., at 2625.
The AEC, however, was given exclusive jurisdiction to license the transfer,
delivery, receipt, acquisition, possession and use of nuclear materials. 42
U.S.C. §§ 2014, (e), (z), (aa), 2061-2064, 2071-2078, 2091-99, 2111-14 (1976
and Supp. IV 1980). Upon these subjects, no role was left for the states.

19

The Commission, however, was not given authority over the generation of
electricity itself, or over the economic question whether a particular plant
should be built. We observed in _Vermont Yankee, supra,_ 435 U.S., at 550, 98
S.Ct., at 1215, that "The Commission's prime area of concern in the licensing
context, . . . is national security, public health, and safety." See also
_Power Reactor Development Corp. v. International Union of Electrical, Radio
and Machine Workers,_ 367 U.S. 396, 415, 81 S.Ct. 1529, 1539, 6 L.Ed.2d 924
(1961) (utility's investment not to be considered by Commission in its
licensing decisions). The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), which now
exercises the AEC's regulatory authority, does not purport to exercise its
authority based on economic considerations, 10 CFR § 8.4, and has recently
repealed its regulations concerning the financial qualifications and
capabilities of a utility proposing to construct and operate a nuclear power
plant. 47 Fed.Reg. 13751. In its notice of rule repeal, the NRC stated that
utility financial qualifications are only of concern to the NRC if related to
the public health and safety.18 It is almost inconceivable that Congress would
have left a regulatory vacuum; the only reasonable inference is that Congress
intended the states to continue to make these judgments. Any doubt that
ratemaking and plant-need questions were to remain in state hands was removed
by § 271, 42 U.S.C. § 2018 which provided:

20

"Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect the authority or
regulations of any Federal, State or local agency with respect to the
generation, sale, or transmission of electric power produced through the use
of nuclear facilities licensed by the Commission . . ."

21

The legislative reports accompanying this provision do little more than
restate the statutory language, S.Rep. No. 1699, 83d Cong., 2d Sess. 31;
H.R.Rep. No. 2181, 83d Cong., 2d Sess. 31 (1954), U.S.Code Cong. & Admin.News
1954, p. 3456, but statements on the floor of Congress confirm that while the
safety of nuclear technology was the exclusive business of the federal
government, state power over the production of electricity was not otherwise
displaced.19

22

The 1959 Amendments reinforced this fundamental division of authority. In
1959, Congress amended the Atomic Energy Act in order to "clarify the
respective responsibilities . . . of the States and the Commission with
respect to the regulation of byproduct, source, and special nuclear
materials." 42 U.S.C. § 2021(a)(1). See S.Rep. No. 870, 86th Cong. 1st Sess.
8, 10-12 (1959), U.S.Code Cong. & Admin.News 1959, p. 2872. The authority of
the states over the planning for new powerplants and ratemaking were not at
issue. Indeed, the point of the 1959 Amendments was to heighten the states'
role. Section 274(b), 42 U.S.C. § 2021(b), authorized the NRC, by agreements
with state governors to discontinue its regulatory authority over certain
nuclear materials under limited conditions.20 State programs permitted under
the amendment were required to be "coordinated and compatible" with that of
the NRC. § 2021(g); S.Rep. No. 870, _supra,_ at 11. The subject matters of
those agreements were also limited by § 274(c), 42 U.S.C. 2021(c), which
states that:

23

"The Commission shall retain authority and responsibility with respect to
regulation of

24

(1) the construction and operation of any production or utilization facility;

25

. . . .

26

(4) the disposal of such . . . byproduct, source or special nuclear material
as the Commission determines . . . should, because of the hazards or potential
hazards thereof, not be so disposed of without a license from the Commission."

27

Although the authority reserved by Section 274(c) was exclusively for the
Commission to exercise, See S.Rep. No. 870 at 8, 9; H.R.Rep. No. 1125, 86th
Cong., 1st Sess. 8, 9 (1959), Congress made clear that the section was not
intended to cutback on preexisting state authority outside the NRC's
jurisdiction.21 Section 274(k), 42 U.S.C. § 2021(k) states:

28

"Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authority of any
state or local agency to regulate activities for purposes other than
protection against radiation hazards."

29

§ 274(k), by itself, limits only the preemptive effect of "this section," that
is, § 274, and does not represent an affirmative grant of power to the states.
But Congress, by permitting regulation "for purposes other than protection
against radiation hazards" underscored the distinction drawn in 1954 between
the spheres of activity left respectively to the federal government and the
states.

30

This regulatory structure has remained unchanged, for our purposes, until
1965, when the following proviso was added to § 271:

31

" _Provided,_ that this section shall not be deemed to confer upon any
Federal, State or local agency any authority to regulate, control, or restrict
any activities of the Commission."

32

The accompanying report by the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy makes clear
that the amendment was not intended to detract from state authority over
energy facilities.22 Instead, the proviso was added to overrule a Court of
Appeals opinion which interpreted § 271 to allow a municipality to prohibit
transmission lines necessary for the AEC's own activities. _Maun v. United
States,_ 347 F.2d 970 (CA9 1965). There is no indication that Congress
intended any broader limitation of state regulatory power over utility
companies. Indeed, reports and debates accompanying the 1965 Amendment
indicate that § 271's purpose "was to make it absolutely clear that the Atomic
Energy Act's special provisions on licensing of reactors did not disturb the
status quo with respect to the then existing authority of Federal, State, and
local bodies to regulate generation, sale, or transmission of electric power."
111 Cong.Rec. 19822 (statement of Sen. Hickenlooper).23

33

This account indicates that from the passage of the Atomic Energy Act in 1954,
through several revisions, and to the present day, Congress has preserved the
dual regulation of nuclear-powered electricity generation: the federal
government maintains complete control of the safety and "nuclear" aspects of
energy generation; the states exercise their traditional authority over the
need for additional generating capacity, the type of generating facilities to
be licensed, land use, ratemaking, and the like.24

34

The above is not particularly controversial. But deciding how § 25524.2 is to
be construed and classified is a more difficult proposition. At the outset, we
emphasize that the statute does not seek to regulate the construction or
operation of a nuclear powerplant. It would clearly be impermissible for
California to attempt to do so, for such regulation, even if enacted out of
non-safety concerns, would nevertheless directly conflict with the NRC's
exclusive authority over plant construction and operation. Respondents appear
to concede as much. Respondents do broadly argue, however, that although
safety regulation of nuclear plants by states is forbidden, a state may
completely prohibit new construction until its safety concerns are satisfied
by the federal government. We reject this line of reasoning. State safety
regulation is not preempted only when it conflicts with federal law. Rather,
the federal government has occupied the entire field of nuclear safety
concerns, except the limited powers expressly ceded to the states.25 When the
federal government completely occupies a given field or an identifiable
portion of it, as it has done here, the test of preemption is whether "the
matter on which the state asserts the right to act is in any way regulated by
the federal government." _Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp., supra,_ 331 U.S.,
at 236, 67 S.Ct., at 1155. A state moratorium on nuclear construction grounded
in safety concerns falls squarely within the prohibited field. Moreover, a
state judgment that nuclear power is not safe enough to be further developed
would conflict directly with the countervailing judgment of the NRC, see,
_infra,_ at 218-219, that nuclear construction may proceed notwithstanding
extant uncertainties as to waste disposal. A state prohibition on nuclear
construction for safety reasons would also be in the teeth of the Atomic
Energy Act's objective to insure that nuclear technology be safe enough for
widespread development and use--and would be preempted for that reason.
_Infra,_ at 221-222.

35

That being the case, it is necessary to determine whether there is a non-
safety rationale for § 25524.2. California has maintained, and the Court of
Appeals agreed, that § 25524.2 was aimed at economic problems, not radiation
hazards. The California Assembly Committee On Resources, Land Use, and Energy,
which proposed a package of bills including § 25524.2, reported that the waste
disposal problem was "largely economic or the result of poor planning, _not_
safety related." Reassessment of Nuclear Energy in California: A Policy
Analysis of Proposition 15 and its Alternatives (1976) (Reassessment Report)
at 18 (emphasis in original). The Committee explained that the lack of a
federally approved method of waste disposal created a "clog" in the nuclear
fuel cycle. Storage space was limited while more nuclear wastes were
continuously produced. Without a permanent means of disposal, the nuclear
waste problem could become critical leading to unpredictably high costs to
contain the problem or, worse, shutdowns in reactors. "Waste disposal
_safety,_ " the Reassessment Report notes, "is not directly addressed by the
bills, which ask only that a method [of waste disposal] be chosen and accepted
by the federal government." _Id.,_ at 156 (emphasis in original).

36

The Court of Appeals adopted this reading of § 25524.2. Relying on the
Reassessment Report, the court concluded:

37

"[S]ection 25524.2 is directed towards purposes other than protection against
radiation hazards. While Proposition 15 would have required California to
judge the safety of a proposed method of waste disposal, section 25524.2
leaves that judgment to the federal government. California is concerned not
with the adequacy of the method, but rather with its existence." 659 F.2d, at
925.

38

Our general practice is to place considerable confidence in the
interpretations of state law reached by the federal courts of appeals. Cf.
_Mills v. Rogers,_ \--- U.S. ----, ----, 102 S.Ct. 2442, 2452, 73 L.Ed.2d 16
(1982); _Bishop v. Wood,_ 426 U.S. 341, 346, 96 S.Ct. 2074, 2078, 48 L.Ed.2d
684 (1976). Petitioners and _amici_ nevertheless attempt to upset this
interpretation in a number of ways. First, they maintain that § 25524.2
evinces no concern with the economics of nuclear power. The statute states
that the "development" and "existence" of a permanent disposal technology
approved by federal authorities will lift the moratorium; the statute does not
provide for considering the economic costs of the technology selected. This
view of the statute is overly myopic. Once a technology is selected and
demonstrated, the utilities and the California Public Utilities Commission
would be able to estimate costs; such cost estimates cannot be made until the
federal government has settled upon the method of long-term waste disposal.
Moreover, once a satisfactory disposal technology is found and demonstrated,
fears of having to close down operating reactors should largely evaporate.

39

Second, it is suggested that California, if concerned with economics, would
have banned California utilities from building plants outside the state. This
objection carries little force. There is no indication that California
utilities are contemplating such construction; the state legislature is not
obligated to address purely hypothetical facets of a problem.

40

Third, petitioners note that there already is a body, the California Public
Utilities Commission, which is authorized to determine on economic grounds
whether a nuclear power plant should be constructed.26 While California is
certainly free to make these decisions on a case-by-case basis, a state is not
foreclosed from reaching the same decision through a legislative judgment,
applicable to all cases. The economic uncertainties engendered by the nuclear
waste disposal problems are not factors that vary from facility to facility;
the issue readily lends itself to more generalized decisionmaking and
California cannot be faulted for pursuing that course.

41

Fourth, petitioners note that Proposition 15, the initiative out of which §
25524.2 arose, and companion provisions in California's so-called nuclear
laws, are more clearly written with safety purposes in mind.27 It is suggested
that § 25524.2 shares a common heritage with these laws and should be presumed
to have been enacted for the same purposes. The short answer here is that
these other state laws are not before the Court, and indeed, Proposition 15
was not passed; these provisions and their pedigree do not taint other parts
of the Warren-Alquist Act.

42

Although these specific indicia of California's intent in enacting § 25524.2
are subject to varying interpretation, there are two further reasons why we
should not become embroiled in attempting to ascertain California's true
motive. First, inquiry into legislative motive is often an unsatisfactory
venture. _United States v. O'Brien,_ 391 U.S. 367, 383, 88 S.Ct. 1673, 1682,
20 L.Ed.2d 672 (1968). What motivates one legislator to vote for a statute is
not necessarily what motivates scores of others to enact it. Second, it would
be particularly pointless for us to engage in such inquiry here when it is
clear that the states have been allowed to retain authority over the need for
electrical generating facilities easily sufficient to permit a state so
inclined to halt the construction of new nuclear plants by refusing on
economic grounds to issue certificates of public convenience in individual
proceedings. In these circumstances, it should be up to Congress to determine
whether a state has misused the authority left in its hands.

43

Therefore, we accept California's avowed economic purpose as the rationale for
enacting § 25524.2. Accordingly, the statute lies outside the occupied field
of nuclear safety regulation.28

B

44

Petitioners' second major argument concerns federal regulation aimed at the
nuclear waste disposal problem itself. It is contended that § 25524.2
conflicts with federal regulation of nuclear waste disposal, with the NRC's
decision that it is permissible to continue to license reactors,
notwithstanding uncertainty surrounding the waste disposal problem, and with
Congress' recent passage of legislation directed at that problem.

45

Pursuant to its authority under the Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 2071-2075, 2111-2114,
the AEC, and later the NRC, promulgated extensive and detailed regulations
concerning the operation of nuclear facilities and the handling of nuclear
materials. The following provisions are relevant to the spent fuel and waste
disposal issues in this case. To receive an NRC operating license, one must
submit a safety analysis report, which includes a "radioactive waste handling
system." 10 CFR 50.34(b)(20)(i), (ii). See also 10 CFR 150.15(a)(1)(i). The
regulations specify general design criteria and control requirements for fuel
storage and handling and radioactive waste to be stored at the reactor site.
10 CFR Part 50, App. A, Criteria 60-64, at 412. In addition, the NRC has
promulgated detailed regulations governing storage and disposal away from the
reactor. 10 CFR Part 72. NRC has also promulgated procedural requirements
covering license applications for disposal of high-level radioactive waste in
geologic repositories. 10 CFR Part 60.

46

Congress gave the Department of Energy the responsibility for "the
establishment of temporary and permanent facilities for the storage,
management, and ultimate disposal of nuclear wastes." 42 U.S.C. §
7133(a)(8)(C). No such permanent disposal facilities have yet to be licensed,
and the NRC and the Department of Energy continue to authorize the storage of
spent fuel at reactor sites in pools of water. In 1977, the NRC was asked by
the Natural Resources Defense Council to halt reactor licensing until it had
determined that there was a method of permanent disposal for high-level waste.
The NRC concluded that, given the progress toward the development of disposal
facilities and the availability of interim storage, it could continue to
license new reactors. _Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. NRC,_ 528
F.2d 166, 168-169 (CA2 1978).

47

The NRC's imprimatur, however, indicates only that it is safe to proceed with
such plants, not that it is economically wise to do so.29 Because the NRC
order does not and could not compel a utility to develop a nuclear plant,
compliance with both it and § 25524.2 are possible. Moreover, because the
NRC's regulations are aimed at insuring that plants are safe, not necessarily
that they are economical, § 25524.2 does not interfere with the objective of
the federal regulation.

48

Nor has California sought through § 25524.2 to impose its own standards on
nuclear waste disposal. The statute accepts that it is the federal
responsibility to develop and license such technology. As there is no attempt
on California's part to enter this field, one which is occupied by the federal
government, we do not find § 25524.2 preempted any more by the NRC's
obligations in the waste disposal field than by its licensing power over the
plants themselves.

49

After this case was decided by the Court of Appeals, a new piece was added to
the regulatory puzzle. In its closing week, the 97th Congress passed the
Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982, Pub.L. 97-425, 96 Stat. 2201 (1982), a
complex bill providing for a multi-faceted attack on the problem. _Inter
alia,_ the bill authorizes repositories for disposal of high-level radioactive
waste and spent nuclear fuel, provides for licensing and expansion of interim
storage, authorizes research and development, and provides a scheme for
financing. While the passage of this new legislation may convince state
authorities that there is now a sufficient federal commitment to fuel storage
and waste disposal that licensing of nuclear reactors may resume, and, indeed,
this seems to be one of the purposes of the Act,30 it does not appear that
Congress intended to make that decision for the states through this
legislation. Senator McClure attempted to do precisely that with an amendment
to the Senate bill providing that the Act satisfied any legal requirements for
the existence of an approved technology and facilities for disposal of spent
fuel and high-level nuclear waste. The amendment was adopted by the Senate
without debate. 128 Cong.Rec. S4310 (April 29, 1982). During subsequent House
hearings, it was strongly urged that this language be omitted so as not to
affect this case. See Nuclear Waste Disposal Policy, Hearings Before the
Subcomm. on Energy Conservation and Power, Committee on Energy and Commerce,
97th Cong., 2d Sess., 356, 406, 553-554 (1982). The bill which emerged from
the House Committee did omit the Senate language, and its manager, Rep.
Ottinger, stated to the House that the language was deleted "to insure that
there be no preemption." 128 Cong.Rec. H8797 (December 2, 1982). The bill
ultimately signed into law followed the House language. While we are correctly
reluctant to draw inferences from the failure of Congress to act, it would, in
this case, appear improper for us to give a reading to the Act that Congress
considered and rejected. Moreover, it is certainly possible to interpret the
Act as directed at solving the nuclear waste disposal problem for existing
reactors without necessarily encouraging or requiring that future plant
construction be undertaken.

C

50

Finally, it is strongly contended that § 25524.2 frustrates the Atomic Energy
Act's purpose to develop the commercial use of nuclear power. It is well
established that state law is preempted if it "stands as an obstacle to the
accomplishment of the full purposes and objectives of Congress." _Hines v.
Davidowitz,_ 312 U.S. 52, 67, 61 S.Ct. 399, 404, 85 L.Ed. 581 (1941); _Florida
Lime & Avocado Growers v. Paul,_ 373 U.S. 132, 142-143, 83 S.Ct. 1210,
1217-18, 10 L.Ed.2d 248 (1963); _Fidelity Federal Savings & Loan Ass'n v. de
la Cuesta,_ \--- U.S., at ----, 102 S.Ct., at 3022.

51

There is little doubt that a primary purpose of the Atomic Energy Act was, and
continues to be, the promotion of nuclear power. The Act itself states that it
is a program "to encourage widespread participation in the development and
utilization of atomic energy for peaceful purposes to the maximum extent
consistent with the common defense and security and with the health and safety
of the public." 42 U.S.C. § 2013(b). The House and Senate Reports confirmed
that it was "a major policy goal of the United States" that the involvement of
private industry would "speed the further development of the peaceful uses of
atomic energy." H.R.Rep. No. 883, 89th Cong., 1st Sess. 4 (1965); H.R.Rep. No.
2181, 83d Cong., 2d Sess. 9 (1954); S.Rep. No. 1699, 83d Cong., 2d Sess. 9
(1934). The same purpose is manifest in the passage of the Price-Anderson Act,
42 U.S.C. § 2210, which limits private liability from a nuclear accident. The
Act was passed "in order to protect the public and to encourage the
development of the atomic energy industry. . ." 42 U.S.C. § 2012(i). _Duke
Power Co. v. Carolina Environmental Study Group, Inc.,_ 438 U.S., at 63-67, 98
S.Ct., at 2625-2627.

52

The Court of Appeals' suggestion that legislation since 1974 has indicated a
"change in congressional outlook" is unconvincing. The court observed that
Congress reorganized the Atomic Energy Commission in 1974 dividing the
promotional and safety responsibilities of the AEC, giving the former to the
Energy Research and Development Administration31 (ERDA) and the latter to the
NRC. Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, 88 Stat. 1233, 42 U.S.C. § 5801, _et
seq._ The evident desire of Congress to prevent safety from being compromised
by promotional concerns does not translate into an abandonment of the
objective of promoting nuclear power. The legislation was carefully drafted,
in fact, to avoid any anti-nuclear sentiment.32 The continuing commitment to
nuclear power is reflected in the extension of the Price-Anderson Act's
coverage until 1987, Pub.L. No. 94-197, § 2-14, 89 Stat. 1111-1115, as well as
in Congress' express preclusion of reliance on natural gas and petroleum as
primary energy sources in new power plants, Powerplant and Industrial Fuel Act
of 1978, 92 Stat. 3291, 42 U.S.C. §§ 8301(b)(3), 8311, 8312(a). It is true, of
course, that Congress has sought to simultaneously promote the development of
alternative energy sources, but we do not view these steps as an indication
that Congress has retreated from its oft-expressed commitment to further
development of nuclear power for electricity generation.

53

The Court of Appeals is right, however, that the promotion of nuclear power is
not to be accomplished "at all costs." The elaborate licensing and safety
provisions and the continued preservation of state regulation in traditional
areas belie that. Moreover, Congress has allowed the States to determine--as a
matter of economics--whether a nuclear plant vis-a-vis a fossil fuel plant
should be built. The decision of California to exercise that authority does
not, in itself, constitute a basis for preemption.33 Therefore, while the
argument of petitioners and the United States has considerable force, the
legal reality remains that Congress has left sufficient authority in the
states to allow the development of nuclear power to be slowed or even stopped
for economic reasons. Given this statutory scheme, it is for Congress to
rethink the division of regulatory authority in light of its possible exercise
by the states to undercut a federal objective. The courts should not assume
the role which our system assigns to Congress.34

IV

The judgment of the Court of Appeals is

54

_Affirmed._

55

Justice BLACKMUN, with whom Justice STEVENS joins, concurring in part and
concurring in the judgment.

56

I join the Court's opinion, except to the extent it suggests that a State may
not prohibit the construction of nuclear power plants if the State is
motivated by concerns about the safety of such plants. Since the Court finds
that California was not so motivated, this suggestion is unnecessary to the
Court's holding. More important, I believe the Court's dictum is wrong in
several respects.

57

The Court takes the position that a State's safety-motivated decision to
prohibit construction of nuclear power plants would be pre-empted for three
distinct reasons. First, the Court states that "the Federal Government has
occupied the entire field of nuclear safety concerns, except the limited
powers expressly ceded to the States." _Ante,_ at 212. Second, the Court
indicates that "a state judgment that nuclear power is not safe enough to be
further developed would conflict squarely with the countervailing judgment of
the NRC . . . that nuclear construction may proceed notwithstanding extant
uncertainties as to waste disposal." _Ibid._ Third, the Court believes that a
prohibition on construction of new nuclear plants would "be in the teeth of
the Atomic Energy Act's objective to insure that nuclear technology be safe
enough for widespread development and use." _Ibid._ For reasons summarized
below, I cannot agree that a State's nuclear moratorium, even if motivated by
safety concerns, would be pre-empted on any of these grounds.

58

* First, Congress has occupied not the broad field of "nuclear safety concerns," but only the narrower area of how a nuclear plant should be constructed and operated to protect against radiation hazards.1 States traditionally have possessed the authority to choose which technologies to rely on in meeting their energy needs. Nothing in the Atomic Energy Act limits this authority, or intimates that a State, in exercising this authority, may not consider the features that distinguish nuclear plants from other power sources. On the contrary, § 271 of the Act, 68 Stat. 960, as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 2018, indicates that States may continue, with respect to nuclear power, to exercise their traditional police power over the manner in which they meet their energy needs. There is, in short, no evidence that Congress had a "clear and manifest purpose," _Rice v. Santa Fe Elevator Corp.,_ 331 U.S. 218, 230, 67 S.Ct. 1146, 1152, 91 L.Ed. 1447 (1947), to force States to be blind to whatever special dangers are posed by nuclear plants.

59

Federal pre-emption of the States' authority to decide against nuclear power
would create a regulatory vacuum. See Wiggins, Federalism Balancing and the
Burger Court: California's Nuclear Law as a Preemption Case Study, 13
U.C.D.L.Rev. 3, 64 (1979). In making its traditional policy choices about what
kinds of power are best suited to its needs, a State would be forced to ignore
the undeniable fact that nuclear power entails certain risks. While the NRC
does evaluate the dangers of generating nuclear power, it does not balance
those dangers against the risks, costs, and benefits of other choices
available to the State or consider the State's standards of public convenience
and necessity. As Professor Wiggins noted:

60

"If a state utility regulatory agency like California's Energy Commission is
prevented from making a general evaluation of feasibility, on broad grounds of
social, economic and ideological policy, then the decision _whether_ to build
a nuclear facility in a state will ultimately be made only by the public
utility seeking its construction. . . . It would be ironic if public energy
utilities, granted a jurisdictional monopoly in large part because of their
heavy regulation by the state, were freed from regulatory oversight of the one
decision which promises to affect the greatest number of persons over the
greatest possible time." _Id.,_ at 64 (emphasis in original).

61

In short, there is an important distinction between the threshold
determination whether to permit the construction of new nuclear plants and, if
the decision is to permit construction, the subsequent determinations of how
to construct and operate those plants. The threshold decision belongs to the
State; the latter decisions are for the NRC. See Note, May A State Say "No" to
Nuclear Power? _Pacific Legal Foundation_ Gives a Disappointing Answer, 10
Envir.L. 189, 199 (1979) (criticizing District Court decision in the present
case).

II

62

The Court's second basis for suggesting that States may not prohibit the
construction of nuclear plants on safety grounds is that such a prohibition
would conflict with the NRC's judgment that construction of nuclear plants may
safely proceed. A flat ban for safety reasons, however, would not make
"compliance with both federal and state regulations . . . a physical
impossibility." _Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul,_ 373 U.S. 132,
142-143, 83 S.Ct. 1210, 1217-1218, 10 L.Ed.2d 248 (1963). The NRC has
expressed its judgment that it is safe to proceed with construction and
operation of nuclear plants, but neither the NRC nor Congress has mandated
that States do so.2 See _ante,_ at 205.

III

63

A state regulation also conflicts with federal law if it "stands as an
obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and
objectives of Congress." _Hines v. Davidowitz,_ 312 U.S. 52, 67, 61 S.Ct. 399,
404, 85 L.Ed. 581 (1941). The Court suggests that a safety-motivated state ban
on nuclear plants would be pre-empted under this standard as well. See _ante,_
at 213,221-222.3 But Congress has merely encouraged the development of nuclear
technology so as to make another source of energy available to the States;
Congress has not forced the States to accept this particular source. See Note,
10 Envir.L., at 199 ("Congress has not evidenced a dictatorial intent for
every state to build nuclear powerplants"). A ban on nuclear plant
construction for safety reasons thus does not conflict with Congress'
objectives or purposes.

64

The Atomic Energy Act was intended to promote the technological development of
nuclear power, at a time when there was no private nuclear power industry. The
Act addressed "the practical question of bringing such an industry into
being,"4 in order to make available an additional energy source. The Court
makes much of the general statements of purpose in the Act and the legislative
history, see _ante,_ at 221, but those statements simply reflect Congress'
desire to create a private nuclear power industry. Congress did not compel
States to give preference to the eventual product of that industry or to
ignore the peculiar problems associated with that product. See Wiggins, 13
U.C.D.L.Rev., at 78.

65

More recent legislation makes it very clear that there is no federal policy
preventing a State from choosing to rely on technologies it considers safer
than nuclear power. The Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, 88 Stat. 1233, 42
U.S.C. § 5801 _et seq.,_ separated promotional and regulatory functions in the
area of nuclear power. The Act established the NRC to perform the regulatory
and licensing functions of the Atomic Energy Commission, § 5841, and the
Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA) to "develop, and
increase the efficiency and reliability of use of, all energy sources." §
5801(a).5 The legislative history of the Act expresses concern about a pro-
nuclear bias in the regulatory agency and demonstrates a desire to have the
Federal Government "place greater relative emphasis on nonnuclear energy."
S.Rep. No. 93-980, p. 14 (1974), U.S.Code Cong. & Admin.News 1974, p. 5480.6

66

This legislative purpose is consistent with the fact that States retain many
means of prohibiting the construction of nuclear plants within their borders.
States may refuse to issue certificates of public convenience and necessity
for individual nuclear power plants. They may establish siting and land use
requirements for nuclear plants that are more stringent than those of the NRC.
Cf. NRC Authorization Act for Fiscal 1980, Pub.L. 96-295, § 108(f), 94 Stat.
783 (1980). Under the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977, States may regulate
radioactive air emissions from nuclear plants and may impose more stringent
emission standards than those promulgated by the NRC. 42 U.S.C. §§ 7416, 7422
(1976 ed., Supp. IV). This authority may be used to prevent the construction
of nuclear plants altogether. _Consolidated Edison Co. of New York, Inc.
(Indian Point Station, Unit No. 2),_ ALAB-453, 7 N.R.C. 31, 34, and n. 13
(1978).

67

In sum, Congress has not required States to "go nuclear," in whole or in part.
The Atomic Energy Act's twin goals were to promote the development of a
technology and to ensure the safety of that technology. Although that Act
reserves to the NRC decisions about how to build and operate nuclear plants,
the Court reads too much into the Act in suggesting that it also limits the
States' traditional power to decide what types of electric power to utilize.
Congress simply has made the nuclear option available, and a State may decline
that option for any reason. Rather than rest on the elusive test of
legislative motive, therefore, I would conclude that the decision whether to
build nuclear plants remains with the States. In my view, a ban on
construction of nuclear power plants would be valid even if its authors were
motivated by fear of a core meltdown or other nuclear catastrophe.

1

See Office of Technology Assessment, Managing Commercial High-Level Waste, 9
(April 1982) (hereafter OTA Study).

2

"For the past several years the Department of Energy or one of its
predecessors has been warning the Congress almost annually of the imminent
closure of a number of nuclear power reactors as a result of the lack of
available capacity to store the spent nuclear fuel. . . . No reactor has yet
shut down for these reasons, largely because utilities have expanded their
storage capacity." H.Rep. No. 97-785, part 1, 97th Cong., 2d Sess (1982) 47;
The Office of Technology Assessment's analysis found that "reactors are
running out of storage space, and some may have to shut down by the mid-1990's
unless more storage space is made available on a timely basis." OTA Study at
27. See also Affidavit of Terry L. Lash (staff scientist for Natural Resources
Defense Council) ¶ 10, App. 419; Affidavit of Dale G. Bridenbaugh (nuclear
engineer) &Par; 28-30, App. 478-480.

3

See H.Rep. 97-785, part 1, 97th Cong., 2d Sess. 46 (1982). "Waste disposal, at
the present stage of technological development, refers to the storage of the
very long lived and highly radioactive waste products until they detoxify
sufficiently that they no longer present an environmental hazard. There are
presently no physical or chemical steps which render this waste less toxic,
other than simply the passage of time." _Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v.
NRDC,_ 435 U.S. 519, 528 n. 6, 98 S.Ct. 1197, 1204 n. 6, 55 L.Ed.2d 460
(1978).

4

See generally Status of Nuclear Fuel Reprocessing, Spent Fuel Storage and
High-Level Waste Disposal, Draft Report, Nuclear Fuel Cycle Committee,
California Energy Commission, (1978), (App. 173-373); Report to the President
by the Interagency Review Group on Nuclear Waste Management (1979) at 37, 47,
61.

5

Committee on Nuclear and Alternative Energy Systems, Nat'l Research Council,
National Academy of Sciences, Energy in Transition 1985-2010 (1979) 314-316.
See also J. Yellin, High Technology and the Courts, 94 Harv.L.Rev. 489, 534
(1981).

6

The uncertainty is reflected in the fact that since 1979 the NRC has been
engaged in a proceeding to reassess the evidentiary basis for its position
that safety considerations will not be compromised by continuing federal
licensing while a waste disposal method is being developed. 44 Fed.Reg. 61373
(1979); see _Minnesota v. NRC,_ 195 U.S.App.D.C. 234, 241, 602 F.2d 412, 419
(CADC 1979). Moreover, the ultimate solution to the waste disposal problem may
entail significant expenditures, affecting the economic attractiveness of the
nuclear option.

7

The applicant must first file a notice of intention to file an application for
certification, after which the Commission conducts a review process for not
more than 12 months. If the notice of intention is approved, the applicant
must then file an application for certification, after which the Commission
conducts a further review process not to exceed 18 months. Unless
certification is granted, the proposed plant cannot be constructed; if
certification is granted the Commission is authorized to make certain
specifications for construction of the plant and is directed to monitor the
construction process.

8

After transmission of a Commission finding to the legislature, the
certification of nuclear power plants continues to be prohibited until 100
legislative days have elapsed without disaffirmance of the findings by either
house of the Legislature, or, if the findings have been disaffirmed but are
then re-adhered to by the State Energy Commission, if the Legislature fails to
void the renewed findings by statute within 100 legislative days after their
retransmittal by the Commission.

9

The District Court found that §§ 25524.1 and 25524.2, coupled with the Energy
Commission's failure to make the required findings, made further investment by
petitioners in nuclear plants "an unreasonable risk." The court also found
that if those sections and other provisions were held invalid, petitioners
would reactivate plans for further nuclear plant development. 489 F.Supp., at
700-701.

10

The court also held unripe challenges to various certification provisions,
Cal.Pub.Res.Code §§ 25500, 25502, 25504, 25511, 25512, 25514, 25516, 25517,
25519, 25520, 25523, 25532, requirements that utilities acquire surrounding
development rights, § 25528, and the reprocessing provisions of § 25524.1(a).
The requirement that a utility propose at least three alternate sites, §
25503, was held ripe for review and not preempted by the Atomic Energy Act for
reasons similar to those applied to § 25524.2. 659 F.2d, at 915-918.

11

Section 271, 42 U.S.C. § 2018, provides that:

"Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect the authority or
regulations of any Federal, State or local agency with respect to the
generation, sale, or transmission of electric power produced through the use
of nuclear facilities licensed by the Commission: _Provided,_ That this
section shall not be deemed to confer upon any Federal, State or local agency
any authority to regulate, control, or restrict any activities of the
Commission."

Section 274(k), 42 U.S.C. § 2021(k), provides that:

"Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authority of any
State or local agency to regulate activities for purposes other than
protection against radiation hazards."

The role of these provisions in the federal regulatory structure is discussed
_infra,_ at 208-211.

12

In the same appeal, the Ninth Circuit consolidated and decided a related
challenge to § 25524.2 brought by a nuclear engineer hired to work on a
proposed nuclear plant who subsequently lost his job when the project was
abandoned. The District Court had held that the engineer had standing to
challenge the waste disposal law and that the law was preempted by the Atomic
Energy Act. _Pacific Legal Foundation v. State Energy Resources Comm'n,_ 472
F.Supp. 191 (S.D.Calif.1979). The Court of Appeals disagreed with the District
Court's standing analysis and reversed. 659 F.2d at 911-914. We denied
certiorari. --- U.S. ----, 102 S.Ct. 2959, 73 L.Ed.2d 1350 (1982).

13

Pacific Gas and Electric, for example, had spent at least $10 million before
even filing a notice of intention to file an application for certification.
_Pacific Gas & Electric v. State Energy Resources and Development Comm'n,_
opinion at 489 F.Supp. 699 (E.D.Calif.1980) (Finding of Fact No. 15).

14

_Pacific Gas & Electric v. State Energy Resources and Development Comm'n,_
opinion at 489 F.Supp. 699 (E.D.Calif.1980) (Finding of Fact No. 13).

15

Respondents also contend that the waste disposal provision question is not
ripe for review because even if the law is invalid, petitioners' injury--being
prevented as a practical matter from building new nuclear power plants--will
not be fully redressed inasmuch as other sections of the Warren-Alquist Act,
not before the Court, also prevent such construction. Respondents also suggest
that this lack of redressability rises to the level of an Article III concern.
Both arguments are predicated entirely upon a statement in petitioners' reply
brief in support of the petition for certiorari that "unless and until the
California certification system statutes are reviewed and at least largely
invalidated, petitioners will not again undertake to build nuclear power
plants in California." Reply Brief at 6. Respondents attempt to draw entirely
too much from this statement. The California certification provisions do not
impose a moratorium on new construction; in the main, they require that
information be gathered on a variety of issues and be considered by the Energy
Commission. Cal.Pub.Res.Code §§ 25500, 25502, 25504, 25511, 25512, 25514,
25516, 25517, 25519, 25520, 25523, 25532. It is unreasonable to presume that
these informational requirements will exert the same chilling effect on new
construction as would a moratorium. The Ninth Circuit concurs.

"[A] delay in adjudication will not cause any undue hardship for the parties.
The certification scheme, in general, does not have an 'immediate and
substantial impact' on the utilities. _Gardner v. Toilet Goods Association,_
387 U.S. 167, 171, 87 S.Ct. 1526, 1528, 18 L.Ed.2d 704 (1967); neither
[Pacific Gas & Electric] nor [So.Calif. Edison] has a notice of intention or
application for certification pending, and the threat that procedural burdens
might someday be imposed or that certification might someday be denied for
failure to meet Energy Commission standards is remote at best." 659 F.2d, at
916 (footnote omitted). Respondents' "fears" that petitioners will not seek to
pursue the nuclear option, notwithstanding a favorable decision in this
litigation, appear greatly exaggerated.

16

The Court of Appeals noted that the draft report by the State Energy
Commission's Nuclear Fuel Cycle Committee, which recommended requiring all
nuclear plants to provide a specified amount of storage space, see Nuclear
Fuel Cycle Committee, Status of Nuclear Fuel Reprocessing, Spent Fuel Storage
and High-Level Waste Disposal 113 (ERCDC Draft Report Jan. 11, 1978), does not
necessarily render the provision ripe. The Committee report is only an
indication of the views of two of five members of the Energy Commission in
1978. Not only may views change in the future, but the report itself cautions
that it does not represent final agency action. Indeed, the full Commission's
decision on Jan. 25, 1978, did not adopt this report or the committee's
recommendations regarding on-site storage. Finally, the recently enacted
Nuclear Waste Disposal Act of 1982, P.L. 97-425, 96 Stat. 2201 (1982),
authorizes the NRC to license technology for the on-site storage of spent
fuel, § 133, and directs the Secretary of Energy to provide up to 1,900 metric
tons of capacity for the storage of spent fuel, § 135; these provisions might
influence the State Commission's ultimate findings.

17

As early as 1920, many states had adopted legislation empowering utility
commissions to regulate electric utilities. See Jones, Origins of the
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity: Developments in the States,
1870-1920, 79 Colum.L.Rev. 426, 454-455 (1979). Today, every state has a
regulatory body with authority for assuring adequate electric service at
reasonable rates. Congressional Research Service, Report on the Electric
Utility Sector: Concepts, Practices, and Problems 12 (Subcomm. Print 1977).
For a description of the regulatory framework in effect in the states, see
American Bar Association, The Need for Power and the Choice of Technologies:
State Decisions on Electric Power Facilities (1981).

18

See also NRC Atomic Safety and Licensing Appeal Board, In re Consol. Edison
Co. of N.Y., Inc., 7 NRC 31, 34 (1978): "States retain the right, even in the
face of the issuance of an NRC construction permit, to preclude construction
on such bases as a lack of need for additional generating capacity or the
environmental unacceptability of the proposed facility or site."

19

100 Cong.Rec. 12015, 12196-202 (1954) (remarks of Sen. Hickenlooper); _id.,_
at 10559 (statements of AEC Chairman Strauss). Particularly instructive is an
exchange on the House floor between Representatives Yates and Cole. Rep. Yates
inquired if the bill imposed the duty upon the Commission "to determine
whether the public convenience and necessity require certain commercial
institutions to be licensed to construct reactors for the production of power
for civilian purposes?" Rep. Cole responded that there was no such imposition
to grant licenses based upon public convenience and necessity. "That," he
said, "is regulated by existing Federal and State authorities. We do not touch
that in any respect." 100 Cong.Rec. 11689 (1954).

20

Authority could be shifted to the states for control over byproduct and source
material, and over special nuclear material "in quantities not sufficient to
form a critical mass." California has signed a § 274 agreement. Cal.Health and
Safety Code §§ 25875-25876 (West 1977).

21

In addition to § 274(k), § 274( _l_ ), 42 U.S.C. § 2021( _l_ ), created an
advisory role for the states respecting activities exclusively within the
NRC's jurisdiction and § 274(g), 21 U.S.C. § 2021(g), directs the Commission
to cooperate with the States even in the formulation of standards for
regulation against radiation hazards.

22

"Because of the unique provisions in the act pertaining to AEC's licensing and
regulation of persons operating reactors which could be used to produce
electricity, there was some feeling of uneasiness among the drafters of the
legislation over the effect of the new law upon other agencies--Federal,
state, and local--having jurisdiction over the generation, sale, and
transmission of electric power. It was recognized by the drafters that the
authority of these other agencies with respect to the generation, sale, and
transmission of electric power produced through the use of nuclear facilities
was not affected by this new law; and that the AEC's regulatory control was
limited to considerations involving the common defense and security and the
special hazards associated with the operation of nuclear facilities."

"Nevertheless, section 271 was added to make it explicit that licensees of the
AEC who produced power though the use of nuclear facilities would otherwise
remain subject to the authority of all appropriate Federal, State, and local
authorities with respect to the generation, sale, or transmission of electric
power. . . . The amendment of this section effected by this bill is intended
as a clarification of the meaning of section 271 as originally enacted."
H.R.Rep. No. 567 89th Cong., 1st Sess. 4, 10 (1965), U.S.Code Cong. &
Admin.News 1965, p. 2775, 2779.

23

While expressions of a subsequent Congress generally are not thought
particularly useful in ascertaining the intent of an earlier Congress, Senator
Hickenlooper, the sponsor of the 1965 Amendment, was also an important figure
in the drafting of the 1954 Act. He elaborated:

"We were conscious that it was not desired that the AEC should engage in the
business of regulating electricity as such . . . We were trying to keep the
AEC out of the business of regulating electricity. That is what gave birth to
section 271. We provided that nothing in the act would affect the local
supervising authority's right to control the manufacture of electricity
generated by nuclear facilities." 111 Cong.Rec. 19822 (1965).

24

Our summary affirmance in _Northern States Power Co. v. Minnesota,_ 447 F.2d
1143 (CA8 1971), aff'd, 405 U.S. 1035, 92 S.Ct. 1307, 31 L.Ed.2d 576 (1972),
is fully consistent with this reading of the division of regulatory authority.
Minnesota's effort to regulate radioactive waste discharges from nuclear
plants fell squarely within the field of safety regulation reserved for
federal regulation. The invalidation of this regulation in _Northern States_
requires no retraction of the state authority preserved in §§ 271 and 274 of
the Act. And, as with all summary affirmances, our action "is not to be read
as an adoption of the reasoning supporting the judgment under review." _Zobel
v. Williams,_ \--- U.S. ----, ----, n. 13, 102 S.Ct. 2309, 2315, n. 13, 72
L.Ed.2d 672 (1982); _Mandel v. Bradley,_ 432 U.S. 173, 176, 97 S.Ct. 2238,
2240, 53 L.Ed.2d 199 (1977) ( _per curiam_ ).

25

In addition to the opportunity to enter into agreements with the NRC under §
274(c), Congress has specifically authorized the states to regulate
radioactive air pollutants from nuclear plants, Clean Air Act Amendments of
1977, § 122, 42 U.S.C. § 7422 (Supp. III 1979), and to impose certain siting
and land use requirements for nuclear plants, NRC Authorization Act for Fiscal
Year 1980, Pub.L. 96-295, 94 Stat. 780 (1980).

26

Cal.Pub.Res.Code § 25524.1-.3 (West 1977 and Supp.1981).

27

The 1976 amendments to the Warren-Alquist Act were passed as an alternative to
Proposition 15, an initiative submitted to California's voters in June of
1976. (By their terms, these provisions would not have become operative if
Proposition 15 had been adopted. Cal.Pub.Res.Code § 25524.2, Historical Note
(West 1977). The proposition was rejected.) Like § 25524.2, Proposition 15,
among other things, barred the construction of new nuclear power plants unless
a permanent method of waste disposal was developed, though Proposition 15 gave
as the reason for its concern the threat of harm to "the land or the people of
. . . California." Similarly, Cal.Pub.Res.Code § 25524.3(b) (West 1982 Supp.),
requires the state Energy Commission to undertake a study of underground
placement and berm containment of nuclear reactors, to determine whether such
construction techniques are necessary for "enhancing the public health and
safety . . ."

28

Petitioners correctly cite _Perez v. Campbell,_ 402 U.S. 637, 651, 91 S.Ct.
1704, 1712, 29 L.Ed.2d 233 (1971) for the proposition that state law may not
frustrate the operation of federal law simply because the state legislature in
passing its law had some purpose in mind other than one of frustration. In
_Perez,_ however, unlike this case, there was an actual conflict between state
and federal law. _Perez_ involved an Arizona law that required uninsured
motorists who had not satisfied judgments against them or had failed to pay
settlements after accidents to prove their financial responsibility before the
state would license them to drive again. The Arizona law, contrary to the
Federal Bankruptcy Act, specified that this obligation would not be discharged
in bankruptcy. We held the state law preempted, despite the fact that its
purpose was to deter irresponsible driving rather than to aid in the
collection of debts. Only if there were an actual conflict between § 25524.2
and the Atomic Energy Act, such that adherence to both were impossible or the
operation of state law frustrated accomplishment of the federal objective,
would _Perez_ be apposite.

29

The Natural Resources Defense Council's petition with the NRC claimed that the
Atomic Energy Act required the agency to consider the safety aspects of off-
site waste disposal in determining whether to license reactors. The NRC denied
the petition, stating that it had to examine only on-site safety risks in its
licensing decisions. 42 Fed.Reg. 34391 (1978). The NRC was _not_ asked to
consider whether nuclear reactors were sufficiently reliable investments in
light of the unresolved waste disposal question, and the NRC did not address
this issue. Nor was the issue raised in the review of the NRC's decision in
_Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. NRC,_ 582 F.2d 166 (CA2 1978). As
the Court of Appeals stated, "the issue . . . is whether NRC, prior to
granting nuclear power reactor operating licenses, is required by the public
health and safety requirements of the [Atomic Energy Act] to make a
determination . . . that high-level radioactive wastes can be permanently
disposed of safely." _Id.,_ at 170.

Similarly, the NRC's proceeding addressing the extent to which assessments of
waste disposal technology should be factored into NRC reactor licensing does
not address the economic ramifications of the issue. This matter has been the
subject of prolonged litigation, and is presently pending before the Court.
See _Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. NRC,_ 547 F.2d 633 (CADC
1976); reversed, sub nom. _Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. Natural
Resources Defense Council, Inc.,_ 435 U.S. 519, 98 S.Ct. 1197, 55 L.Ed.2d 460
(1978), on remand, 685 F.2d 459 (CADC 1982), cert. granted, --- U.S. ----, 103
S.Ct. 443, 74 L.Ed.2d 599 (1982).

30

The Act itself, § 111(b), enumerates the following purposes:

"(1) to establish a schedule for the siting, construction, and operation of
repositories that will provide a reasonable assurance that the public and the
environment will be adequately protected from the hazards posed by high-level
radioactive waste and . . . spent nuclear fuel . . ."

"(2) to establish the Federal responsibility, and a definite Federal policy,
for the disposal of such waste and spent fuel;"

See also H.Rep. 97-785, 97th Cong., 2d Sess. 59-60 (purpose of Act to provide
"reasonable assurance that safe waste disposal methods will be available when
needed."); 128 Cong.Rec. H8162 (Sept. 30, 1982) (remarks of Rep. Udall);
_Id.,_ at H8166 (Sept. 30, 1982) (remarks of Rep. Winn) (the Act "demonstrates
to the public and to the industry that the Federal government is fulfilling
its responsibility to dispose of high-level waste.")

31

In 1977, ERDA's functions were transferred to the Department of Energy. 91
Stat. 577, 42 U.S.C. § 7151(a) (1976 ed., Supp. IV).

32

The Senate bill had included language prohibiting the Energy Research and
Development Administration (ERDA) from "giving unwarranted priority to any
single energy source" out of concern that ERDA "may give an unwarranted
priority to development of nuclear power to the detriment of competing energy
technologies." S.Rep. No. 980, 93d Cong., 2d Sess., at 27, U.S.Code Cong. &
Admin.News 1974, p. 5470, 5489. The House bill expressed no concern about
giving "unwarranted priority" to nuclear power. H.R.Rep. No. 93-707, 93d
Cong., 1st Sess. (1973). The bill reported by the Conference Committee, and
subsequently enacted, did not contain the Senate's prohibitory language, but
instead stated that all technologies were to be promoted. H.R.Rep. No.
93-1445, 93d Cong., 2d Sess. 25 (1974).

33

We recently rejected a similar claim that Congressional policy to favor the
use of coal as a fuel source preempted state legislation that may have an
adverse effect on the use of coal. _Commonwealth Edison Co. v. Montana,_ 453
U.S. 609, 633, 101 S.Ct. 2946, 2962, 69 L.Ed.2d 884 (1981).

34

Our resolution of this case is not controlled by _First Iowa Hydro-Elec.
Cooperative v. FPC,_ 328 U.S. 152, 66 S.Ct. 906, 90 L.Ed. 1143 (1946). In
_First Iowa,_ this Court held that compliance with requirements for a state
permit under Iowa law was not necessary in order to secure a federal license
for a hydroelectric project. Allowing the states to veto federal decisions
could "destroy the effectiveness of the Federal Act. It would subordinate to
the control of the State the 'comprehensive' planning which the Act provides
shall depend upon the judgment of [the federal government]." _Id.,_ at 164, 66
S.Ct., at 911. In the same manner, requiring compliance with state
requirements would have reduced the project to a size that the Federal Power
Commission had determined was inadequate, and compliance with state
engineering requirements could handicap the financial success of the project.
The Atomic Energy Act does not give the NRC comprehensive planning
responsibility. Moreover, § 25524.2 does not interfere with the type of plant
that could be constructed. State regulations which affected the construction
and operation of federally approved nuclear power plants would pose a
different case.

1

The Court recognizes the limited nature of the federal role, _ante,_ at 205,
but then describes that role in more expansive terms, _ante,_ at 212-213.

2

A conflict would exist, of course, if the NRC determined that construction of
nuclear plants could not proceed and a State nevertheless chose to go ahead
with construction. Cf. _Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul,_ 373
U.S., at 143, 83 S.Ct., at 1218.

3

The Court states that such a ban would be "in the teeth of the Atomic Energy
Act's objective to insure that nuclear technology be safe enough for
widespread development and use." _Ante,_ at 213. A State's decision not to
permit construction of nuclear plants, however, affects only indirectly the
Atomic Energy Act's goal of ensuring that nuclear power be safe enough for
widespread development. A safety-motivated ban might highlight a State's
perception that the federal safety goal had not been accomplished, but the ban
itself would not interfere with efforts to achieve that goal.

The Court apparently believes the Atomic Energy Act's actual purpose was to
maximize the use of nuclear power to satisfy the Nation's needs. A moratorium
on construction of nuclear plants would prevent the accomplishment of this
goal, but, as demonstrated _infra,_ the Court is incorrect in attributing this
goal to Congress. Moreover, the degree to which a nuclear moratorium hampers
achievement of the goal does not depend on the motives of its framers.

4

Address by Congressman Cole, Chairman of Jt. Comm. on Atomic Energy, delivered
at International Congress on Nuclear Engineering (June 24, 1954), quoted in
Lemov, State and Local Control Over the Location of Nuclear Reactors Under the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 39 N.Y.U.L.Rev. 1008, 1018 (1964).

5

In 1977, ERDA's functions were transferred to the Department of Energy. 91
Stat. 577, 42 U.S.C. § 7151(a) (1976 ed., Supp. IV).

6

In subsequent legislation Congress has continued to promote many sources of
energy, without giving preference to nuclear power. See, _e.g.,_ Powerplant
and Industrial Fuel Use Act of 1978, 92 Stat. 3291, 42 U.S.C. § 8301 _et seq._
(1976 ed., Supp. IV) (encouraging greater use of coal and other alternative
fuels in lieu of natural gas and petroleum); Public Utility Regulatory
Policies Act of 1978, § 210, 92 Stat. 3144, 16 U.S.C. § 824a-3 (1976 ed.,
Supp. V) (encouraging development of cogeneration and small power production
facilities).

